Title: Beyond Success: Refining Elegant Robot Manipulation from Mixed-Quality Data via Just-in-Time Intervention

URL Source: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2026/papers/Mao_Beyond_Success_Refining_Elegant_Robot_Manipulation_from_Mixed-Quality_Data_via_CVPR_2026_paper.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 16 May 2026 16:47:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Success: Refining Elegant Robot Manipulation from Mixed-Quality Data via Just-in-Time Intervention 

## Yanbo Mao 1 Jianlong Fu 2 Ruoxuan Zhang 1 Hongxia Xie 1 Meibao Yao 1∗

1Jilin University 2Microsoft Research Asia Elegance Critic  

> Elegance Critic
> Mixed -Quality Learning Inputs LIBERO -Elegant Benchmark & Elegance Critic
> Just In Time Intervention(JITI)

Mixed -Quality 

Dataset             

> Vision
> Language
> Action
> Model
> Vision
> Language
> Action
> Model
> Observation
> pick up the
> book and place
> it in the caddy
> Instruction
> Alignment
> Misalignment
> Critical Moments !
> Cand. Action 1
> Cand. Action N
> Success Criteria
> ketchup in basket
> Elegance Criteria
> ketchup in basket
> Stable ketchup
> No premature release
> Success Criteria
> Elegance Criteria
> plate at frontRegion
> plate at frontRegion
> No collision

Figure 1. Overview of our motivation, benchmark, and method. (Top left) Due to the mixed-quality nature of human demonstrations, VLA models exhibit correspondingly mixed-quality execution at inference time. (Top right) The proposed LIBERO-Elegant Benchmark introduces explicit Success and Elegance Criteria, enabling an Elegance-Enriched Dataset and the training of an Elegance Critic for assess-ing execution quality. (Bottom) At inference time, our Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mechanism monitors the critic’s confidence and selectively refines the policy at critical moments, providing non-invasive, value-guided improvements in execution elegance. 

## Abstract 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have enabled no-table progress in general-purpose robotic manipulation, yet their learned policies often exhibit variable execution qual-ity. We attribute this variability to the mixed-quality na-ture of human demonstrations, where the implicit principles that govern how actions should be carried out are only par-tially satisfied. To address this challenge, we introduce the LIBERO-Elegant benchmark with explicit criteria for eval-uating execution quality. Using these criteria, we develop a decoupled refinement framework that improves execution quality without modifying or retraining the base VLA policy. 

> *

Corresponding author: meibaoyao@jlu.edu.cn 

We formalize Elegant Execution as the satisfaction of Im-plicit Task Constraints (ITCs) and train an Elegance Critic via offline Calibrated Q-Learning to estimate the expected quality of candidate actions. At inference time, a Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mechanism monitors critic con-fidence and intervenes only at decision-critical moments, providing selective, on-demand refinement. Experiments on LIBERO-Elegant and real-world manipulation tasks show that the learned Elegance Critic substantially improves ex-ecution quality, even on unseen tasks. The proposed model enables robotic control that values not only whether tasks succeed, but also how they are performed. Code and bench-mark available on GitHub. This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation. Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version; the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore. 13508 1. Introduction 

A long-standing goal in robotics is to deploy autonomous agents that can operate with human-like dexterity and safety in everyday environments. Imitation learning, espe-cially in the form of large-scale Vision–Language–Action (VLA) models [1, 9, 23, 27, 31, 43], has become a lead-ing paradigm for realizing this vision. Trained on ex-tensive, internet-scale demonstrations, these models can interpret natural-language instructions and generalize to novel scenes, marking a substantial step forward in general-purpose robotic intelligence [41]. However, the performance of these powerful models is fundamentally tied to the quality of their training data, re-vealing a critical yet often underestimated challenge. Real-world demonstration data is inherently heterogeneous and contains demonstrations of mixed and often sub-optimal quality [13, 24]. It is a noisy mixture of expert-level ex-ecutions, hesitant corrections, inefficient movements, and even outright failures. Standard behavioral cloning inher-its this full behavioral distribution, resulting in policies that can produce precise, expert-like motions, but may also express suboptimal or inconsistent behaviors at inference time. The capability for high-quality execution exists within the model, yet it is not expressed reliably. For instance, in a placement task, the policy may either lower an object to a stable, well-aligned contact or release it too early, causing it to fall or bounce on the target surface. To identify what differentiates high-quality behaviors from flawed ones, we we draw on the notion of Implicit Task Constraints (ITCs) , the latent rules that specify how an action should be executed, beyond merely achieving the final outcome. These constraints include proper timing of releases, precise placement, pose alignment, and avoiding unintended contacts. We refer to trajectories that satisfy these constraints while also completing the task as Elegant Executions . To make these implicit constraints operational, we introduce the LIBERO-Elegant Benchmark, which pro-vides a standardized set of manipulation tasks for studying execution quality in a controlled setting. The key question then is how a robot can learn to infer and fulfill these con-straints from demonstrations where they are only intermit-tently satisfied. In seeking an answer, we turn to how humans refine their own motor skills. When practicing a task, humans do not correct their motions uniformly along the entire trajec-tory; instead, they selectively attend to a small number of 

decision-critical moments where subtle adjustments have disproportionate influence on the final outcome. This in-sight suggests a similar decomposition for robots: evalu-ate while executing. A pre-trained VLA policy handles broad task execution, while a lightweight Elegance Critic 

is responsible solely for assessing execution quality. Dur-ing inference, our Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mecha-nism monitors the critic’s uncertainty and intervenes only at decision-critical states, providing selective, non-invasive refinement rather than continuous control (see Fig. 1). Building on these observations, this work makes the fol-lowing contributions: • We formalize Elegant Execution as the reliable satisfac-tion of Implicit Task Constraints (ITCs), shifting the fo-cus from binary success to the quality of manipulation. • We construct the LIBERO-Elegant Benchmark , a cu-rated suite of tasks that evaluates motion quality beyond binary success, enabling systematic study of execution quality in manipulation. • We propose a non-invasive refinement framework that de-couples execution from evaluation through an Elegance Critic and a Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mecha-nism. • Through comprehensive experiments in both simulation and real-world settings, we demonstrate significant gains in execution quality while further confirming the effec-tiveness and robust generalization of our approach across diverse manipulation tasks. 

## 2. Related Works 

Data-Centric Approaches to Imitation Learning. Data-Centric Approaches address the challenge of mixed-quality data by operating directly on the dataset, optimizing the pol-icy via purification or restructuring. The core hypothesis for this class of methods is that standard Behavioral Cloning (BC) will yield a superior policy, provided that the data dis-tribution it imitates is improved. Common techniques in-clude training discriminators or self-supervised models to filter or re-weight data [2, 34, 36, 39], using importance sampling to correct for distribution shift [14], or leveraging retrieval and conditional generation to extract useful behav-iors from unlabeled data [3, 6, 7]. However, these methods remain short-sighted: they re-shape the static dataset rather than learning value functions that reason about long-term consequences. This motivates the shift toward Reinforcement Learning. 

Policy Improvement via Online Reinforcement Learn-ing. Online Reinforcement Learning (Online RL) is a com-mon strategy for improving policies beyond BC. It typi-cally follows a “pre-train and fine-tune” paradigm: a pol-icy, often a large VLA model, is initialized via supervised fine-tuning or BC and then improved through online inter-action in a live environment. This remains a highly ac-tive research area, with numerous frameworks proposed to enhance policies beyond their static-data initialization [4, 5, 8, 18–20, 22, 28, 29, 33, 38]. However, Online RL poses major challenges for large-scale robotic VLAs: it demands costly and unsafe real-world interaction, and fine-tuning remains invasive and un-stable. These issues motivate a shift toward Offline Rein-13509 forcement Learning. 

Policy Improvement via Offline Reinforcement Learn-ing. Offline Reinforcement Learning (Offline RL) improves policies from static datasets without any online interac-tion, addressing the cost and safety concerns of the online paradigm. However, it faces the out-of-distribution (OOD) problem, where distributional shift can induce value over-estimation. Representative algorithms such as CQL [12], IQL [11], and Cal-QL [25] mitigate this via conservative objectives and value calibration that constrain learning to the dataset’s support. Building on these foundations, recent studies have ex-plored integrating Offline RL with large VLA models for data-efficient refinement. Two paradigms have emerged: (i) invasive policy optimization, which fine-tunes pretrained VLA models [35, 40, 44] but risks catastrophic forget-ting, and (ii) decoupled inference-time guidance, which pre-serves the base model and employs a lightweight critic to guide outputs during inference [26, 32, 37, 42]. The lat-ter is non-invasive and retains the generality of pretrained policies. Our work situates firmly within this decoupled paradigm, but pursues a more quality-aware objective: elegant execu-tion . It is defined as the satisfaction of fine-grained, implicit task constraints often overlooked in mixed-quality demon-strations. To this end, we introduce the LIBERO-Elegant Benchmark and train a lightweight critic to deliver just-in-time, non-invasive guidance during inference. 

## 3. LIBERO-Elegant Benchmark 

3.1. Overview 

To evaluate manipulation quality beyond binary task suc-cess, we introduce the LIBERO-Elegant Benchmark, a cu-rated extension of LIBERO [17]. Although every demon-stration in LIBERO is labeled as successful, they differ sub-stantially in how implicit task constraints (ITCs) are sat-isfied. LIBERO-Elegant makes this variation measurable through a set of quality-sensitive tasks, unified elegance cri-teria, and an Elegance-Enriched Dataset used for training value-based critics. 

3.2. Task Design and Evaluation Criteria 

LIBERO-Elegant contains eight manipulation tasks se-lected for their sensitivity to execution quality. Typical behaviors include precise placement, controlled insertion, and collision-free pushing, each governed by implicit con-straints such as accurate centering, stable contact, and ob-stacle avoidance. Each task is evaluated under two complementary cri-teria: Success Criteria , which follow LIBERO’s original goal conditions, and Elegance Criteria , which assess exe-cution quality along four dimensions: • Task Sequence Integrity : whether the action sequence follows the intended steps and completes each required phase. • Target Pose Accuracy : whether the final object position lies within the required spatial tolerance. • Pose Alignment : whether the final orientation matches the task-specific rotational target. • Collision-Free Execution : whether the motion avoids unintended contact with the environment or other objects. These dimensions provide a consistent framework for eval-uating manipulation elegance across tasks. Additional task details are provided in Supp. B.2. 

3.3. Annotation and Reward Design 

To provide supervision for evaluating elegance, we anno-tate short temporal segments where ITCs are most relevant and assign binary rewards rt ∈ { 0, 1} indicating whether the constraints are satisfied. Premature releases or mis-aligned placements receive 0, while controlled, constraint-satisfying transitions receive 1. The resulting Elegance-Enriched Dataset Delegant augments each demonstration with a short labeled segment indicating whether the implicit constraints are satisfied. All annotations are cross-validated by multiple raters for consistency, with further implementa-tion details in Supp. B.3. 

3.4. Data Statistics 

LIBERO-Elegant consists of 8 manipulation tasks , cover-ing 327 demonstration episodes and approximately 52.7K frames of synchronized RGB-D and proprioceptive data. Among them, 148 episodes exhibit high-quality execu-tion and receive positive elegance rewards. Each rewarded episode is annotated over a single 25-frame window corre-sponding to the key moment where ITCs are most critical. 

## 4. Method 

Our goal is to enhance the elegance of robotic manipula-tion by encouraging behaviors that better satisfy Implicit Task Constraints (ITCs). To this end, we adopt a decoupled three-stage framework (overview in Fig. 2) that performs evaluation during execution. A base Vision-Language-Action (VLA) policy executes the task, while a lightweight 

Elegance Critic assesses motion quality and provides selec-tive, inference-time guidance. 

Stage 1 trains a base VLA policy πθ on mixed-quality demonstrations to capture the overall behavioral distribu-tion (Sec. 4.1). Stage 2 uses the LIBERO-Elegant anno-tations to train an Elegance Critic Qϕ via Calibrated Q-Learning (Cal-QL) [25] (Sec. 4.2). Stage 3 integrates the two through the Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mecha-nism, which monitors critic confidence and refines actions only at decision-critical moments, without retraining or continuous guidance (Sec. 4.3). 13510 Observation                  

> Instruction
> VLA Model
> Time
> VLA Model
> pick up the
> book and place
> it in the caddy
> Critical Moment s!
> Sample & Select & Execute
> Critical Moments !No n-critical Moments !
> Execute Default Action Sample & Select & Execute
> 𝐴 𝑡 −1
> 0
> 𝑄 𝑡 −1
> 0𝑄 𝑡
> 𝑁
> 𝑄 𝑡
> 1…
> 𝐴 𝑡
> 0
> 𝑄 𝑡
> 0
> 𝐴 𝑡
> 1𝐴 𝑡
> 𝑁
> …
> VLA Model
> 𝑄 𝑡 +1
> 𝑁 𝑄 𝑡 +1
> 1…
> 𝐴 𝑡 +1
> 0
> 𝑄 𝑡 +1
> 0
> 𝐴 𝑡 +1
> 1𝐴 𝑡 +1
> 𝑁
> …
> Max Max Max

Figure 2. Illustration of the proposed Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) process. At each timestep, the Elegance Critic monitors its predicted value. When confidence remains stable (non-critical moment), the default action from the base policy is executed directly. When significant value fluctuation is detected, JITI triggers multi-sample evaluation and selects the action with the highest predicted elegance. Elegance -Enriched           

> Dataset
> VLA Model
> VLM backbone
> state next
> state action reward
> Elegant Critic
> VLM -based refinement head Cal -QL
> stat eembs nex tstat e
> embs
> 𝑠 𝑡 𝑠 𝑡 +1𝑎 𝑡 𝑟 𝑡
> 𝑓 𝑠 𝑓 𝑠 ′

Figure 3. Training pipeline of the Elegance Critic. Samples from the Elegance-Enriched Dataset are first processed by the frozen VLA backbone to obtain contextual embeddings. These embeddings, together with the corresponding actions and graded rewards, are then fed into the Calibrated Q-Learning (Cal-QL) module, which refines them to update the critic. 

4.1. Base Generative Policy Training 

We begin Stage 1 by training a base generative policy πθ

designed to capture the full distribution of human actions within the mixed-quality dataset. Rather than differentiat-ing between good and poor demonstrations at this stage, 

πθ is trained to model the overall behavioral distribution 

p(At | st) observed in human data. The policy πθ is implemented as a flow-matching gener-ative model [16]. At its core lies a Transformer-based net-work vθ , which learns a continuous-time vector field that transforms a noise sample into a clean action. Specifically, the network vθ (Aτt , s t) takes the current state st together with a “noisy action” Aτt corresponding to a noise level 

τ ∈ [0 , 1] as input. It then predicts the instantaneous flow direction that moves Aτt toward the target action At.During training, we sample a ground-truth action At

from the mixed-quality dataset D and a Gaussian noise vector ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ). A noisy action is constructed as 

Aτt = τ A t + (1 − τ )ϵ for a random τ . The network param-eters θ are then optimized by minimizing the mean squared error between the predicted and target vector fields: 

LFM (θ) = Eτ, (st,A t), ϵ 

h

∥vθ (Aτt , s t) − (At − ϵ)∥22

i

. (1) This objective trains vθ to estimate the direction from a noisy sample ϵ toward its corresponding clean action At,enabling the model to learn a smooth mapping between noise and action space. After training, the policy πθ functions as a generative model that can sample actions conditioned on a given state 

st. Starting from an initial noise vector A0 

> t

∼ N (0 , I ), the model integrates the learned vector field vθ over τ ∈ [0 , 1] .A numerical solver, such as the forward Euler method, is then applied to obtain the clean action sample. Importantly, by initializing with multiple noise samples, 

πθ can generate a diverse set of candidate actions for the same state st. This diversity provides the foundation for the value-guided selection mechanism used in our Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) algorithm introduced in Stage 3. 

4.2. Offline Elegance Critic Training 

In Stage 2 , we train an Elegance Critic Qϕ(st, a t), which provides an evaluative signal for selecting elegant actions during inference (Stage 3). The critic is trained to estimate the expected cumulative return that reflects both task suc-cess and behavioral elegance, leveraging the graded reward annotations described in Sec. 3. This allows it to distinguish subtle differences in motion quality that are not captured by binary success labels. 

Elegance Critic Architecture. The training pipeline of the Elegance Critic is illustrated in Fig. 3. During training, the critic learns from the Elegance-Enriched Dataset Delegant 

containing tuples (st, a t, r t, s t+1 ), where each reward rt

encodes the degree of elegance according to implicit task constraints. To leverage prior knowledge while remaining 13511 modular, the critic builds upon the pre-trained VLA foun-dation model from Stage 1 in a decoupled manner. The multi-modal input states st and st+1 , comprising visual ob-servations, language instruction, and robot proprioception, are passed through the frozen VLM backbone to extract in-termediate representations. These features are passed to a VLM-based refinement head, which repurposes the frozen backbone representations for value estimation. This allows the critic to capture task- and reward-relevant nuances with-out modifying the pre-trained encoder. The resulting con-textual embeddings fs and fs′ are concatenated with the ac-tion at and the annotated reward rt. These features are then passed through the Calibrated Q-Learning (Cal-QL) mod-ule to update the critic parameters ϕ, resulting in the learned value function Qϕ(st, a t).

Calibrated Q-Learning for Elegance-Aware Value Esti-mation. Learning to evaluate elegance from mixed-quality demonstrations poses a dual challenge: the critic must re-main sensitive to graded, fine-grained rewards that encode implicit task constraints while avoiding overestimation on unseen or low-quality actions that fall outside the dataset’s support. To balance elegance sensitivity with distributional con-servatism , we adapt Calibrated Q-Learning (Cal-QL) [25] to train the Elegance Critic. Here, Cal-QL acts as a cali-bration mechanism that aligns the critic’s value predictions with the behavioral distribution while preserving its respon-siveness to the graded elegance rewards. Specifically, the calibration regularizer is defined as: 

Rcal (ϕ) = Es∼D 

h

max  Ea∼π(·| s)Qϕ(s, a ), V μ(s)

− Ea∼D (·| s)Qϕ(s, a )

i

. (2) This formulation ensures that when the critic’s estimate for in-distribution actions is already below the behavioral value Vμ(s), it does not push them down any further. Thus, the critic’s confidence is properly calibrated, yielding con-servative yet accurate value estimates. The full critic objective is therefore given by: 

LCal-QL (ϕ) = LBellman (ϕ) + λcal Rcal (ϕ), (3) where LBellman (ϕ) enforces temporal consistency: 

LBellman (ϕ) = E(st,a t,r t,s t+1 )∼D 

h

Qϕ(st, a t)

−  rt + γ max  

> a′

Qϕ′ (st+1 , a ′)i2

, (4) and Qϕ′ denotes a slowly updated target network. Through this formulation, the Elegance Critic learns cal-ibrated value estimates that faithfully capture the nuanced notion of elegance within the data’s support, while main-taining conservatism for unseen behaviors. This balance enables reliable, value-guided refinement during inference (Stage 3). 

4.3. Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) 

Upon completion of offline training, the framework yields a generative base policy πθ (Stage 1) capable of stochastically producing trajectories of varying quality, and an Elegance Critic Qϕ (Stage 2) trained to evaluate the expected ele-gance of state–action pairs. The final stage integrates these two components at inference time. A naive solution is to sample multiple trajectories from 

πθ at every timestep, evaluate them all using Qϕ, and exe-cute the most elegant action. Although effective, this “full guidance” strategy is computationally expensive and unnec-essary, most decisions are locally unambiguous. In practice, only a few critical moments significantly influence the over-all elegance of a trajectory. The key insight motivating our method is that a trajec-tory’s overall elegance is primarily determined by a small number of critical moments , instances where local decisions have a disproportionate influence on the global quality of the motion. To exploit this property, we propose the Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) algorithm: an event-driven, plug-and-play guidance mechanism that activates high-cost multi-sample evaluation only when the policy exhibits signs of uncertainty. 

Identifying Critical Moments via Q-Value Fluctuation. 

The Elegance Critic Qϕ serves as a learned estimator of the expected elegance achievable from a given state-action pair 

(st, a t). Intuitively, when the base policy πθ operates in familiar regions and proposes actions consistent with the learned notion of elegance , the critic’s Q-value predictions remain stable and high-confidence. Conversely, when the policy encounters out-of-distribution states or issues a suboptimal action (e.g., an unstable grasp or an inefficient trajectory), its confidence declines. This instability manifests as a sharp, sudden fluctuation in the predicted Q-values. This fluctuation, either a sudden drop (signaling a loss of value) or a sudden spike (signaling a critical, high-stakes moment), indicates a temporal inconsistency in the critic’s evaluation. These fluctuations naturally arise from the critic’s dual training dynamics. The sharp value spikes reflect Bell-man backups triggered by the sparse, graded rewards that delineate critical, high-reward temporal segments in the Elegance-Enriched Dataset. The sudden drops stem from the conservative regularization in Calibrated Q-Learning (Cal-QL), which penalizes out-of-distribution or non-elegant actions. Together, these effects enable the critic to recognize both high-value states and low-confidence transitions .13512 Algorithm 1 Computation of Q-value Fluctuation and JITI Guidance 

Input: Base policy πθ , Elegance Critic Qϕ, threshold τ ,window size k, candidate count N 

> 1:

Initialize Q-value history buffer H ← ∅  

> 2:

for each timestep t = 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 3:

Sample default action A0 

> t

∼ πθ (st) 

> 4:

Evaluate qt = Qϕ(st, A 0 

> t

) 

> 5:

Update buffer Ht ← Ht−1∪{ qt}, keep last k values  

> 6:

Compute mean ¯qt = 1

> |Ht|

P 

> qi∈Ht

qi 

> 7:

Compute fluctuation ∆qt = |qt − ¯qt| 

> 8:

if ∆qt ≤ τ then  

> 9:

Execute default action At = A0 

> t
> 10:

else  

> 11:

Sample N candidate actions Ac =

{A1 

> t

, . . . , A Nt } ∼ πθ (st) 

> 12:

Evaluate each candidate: qi = Qϕ(st, A it) 

> 13:

Select At = arg max a∈A c Qϕ(st, a ) 

> 14:

Execute At 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for 

We quantify this behavior via a Q-value fluctuation met-ric ∆qt = |qt − ¯qt |, where qt = Qϕ (st, A 0 

> t

) is the critic’s evaluation of the default policy action and ¯qt is the moving average over a short history window. A small ∆qt indi-cates temporal consistency and high critic confidence. In contrast, a sudden spike, whether reflecting entry into an ITC-relevant, high-value segment or a drop caused by un-certainty, signals a decision-critical moment. Thus, ∆qt

provides a principled, low-cost indicator for when to inter-vene. 

The JITI Guidance Algorithm. At inference time, JITI continuously monitors ∆qt and compares it to a predefined threshold τ . When ∆qt ≤ τ , the moment is considered non-critical, and the system executes the default policy action 

At = A0 

> t

, requiring only a single critic evaluation. When 

∆qt > τ , JITI identifies a critical moment of heightened uncertainty. It then intervenes by sampling multiple candi-date actions from πθ , scoring them with the Elegance Critic, and executing the one with the highest predicted elegance. The complete procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. Through this event-driven guidance scheme, JITI main-tains the efficiency of single-sample execution during rou-tine decisions, while selectively invoking multi-sample evaluation at critical points of elevated uncertainty. This mechanism enables on-demand refinement without retrain-ing πθ , effectively filtering out sub-optimal behaviors and ensuring consistent elegance across the entire trajectory. 

## 5. Experiments 

We design a series of experiments to systematically answer the following research questions: • RQ1: Effectiveness. Does the proposed JITI-guided Ele-gance Critic improve task performance and behavioral el-egance compared to base vision-language-action (VLA) policies? • RQ2: Component Contribution. How does each module, particularly the Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mechanism and the elegance-oriented reward calibration, contribute to the overall performance? • RQ3: Generalization. Can the Elegance Critic general-ize its learned concept of “elegance” to unseen yet seman-tically similar manipulation tasks without retraining? Together, these research questions evaluate our method from three key perspectives: effectiveness , modularity , and 

generalization .

5.1. Simulation Experimental Setup 

Benchmark. All simulation experiments are conducted on the LIBERO-Elegant Benchmark introduced in Sec. 3, which augments LIBERO tasks with task-specific elegance criteria to evaluate execution quality beyond success. 

Evaluation Metrics. Our primary metric is the Elegant Success Rate (ESR) . An episode is considered an elegant success if and only if it achieves the task goal and satisfies all predefined elegance constraints. All reported ESR values are averaged over 50 evaluation rollouts per task. 

Implementation Details. We evaluate two representative Vision-Language-Action (VLA) architectures with differ-ent model capacities: SmolVLA (450M) and Isaac GR00T N1.5 (3B). The SmolVLA base policy is trained for 100k steps (batch size 64) on an NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU, while the Isaac GR00T N1.5 model is finetuned for 50k steps (batch size 16) on four NVIDIA A40 GPUs following the official GR00T finetuning pipeline. Both corresponding Elegance Critics are trained for 20k steps (batch size 32) on an RTX 5090 GPU using AdamW with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5. And we em-ploy SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct [21] and Eagle2-1B [15] as VLM-based refinement heads for the SmolVLA and GR00T variants, respectively. 

5.2. Effectiveness (RQ1) 

We begin by addressing RQ1 (Effectiveness) , whether our JITI-guided Elegance Critic can improve both task success and behavioral elegance over baseline VLA policies. We evaluate this by comparing our method against the unmod-ified base policies across diverse manipulation tasks in the LIBERO-Elegant benchmark. As shown in Table 8 , our JITI-guided Elegance Critic yields substantial and consistent performance gains across 13513 70                             

> 30
> 34
> 52 50
> 42
> 48
> 72
> 49.8
> 84
> 52
> 30
> 56
> 26
> 34
> 58
> 90
> 53.8
> 86
> 68
> 42
> 62 60
> 54
> 74
> 92
> 67.2
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> T-0 T-1 T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 Avg.
> SmolVLA Ours(JITI) Full -Guidance
> 13.66 13.73
> 11.72
> 28.46
> 16 .00 16.28 15.52 14.58
> 16.25
> 4.63 4.14
> 2.56
> 16.88
> 5.13 6.00 5.59 5.17 6.26
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> T-0 T-1 T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 Avg.
> (b) Avg. Intervention Count (per episode) ↓
> (a) Elegant Success Rate (ESR %) ↑
> Ours(JITI) Full -Guidance

Figure 4. Ablation on the Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mechanism. (a) Elegant Success Rate (ESR, %) across eight LIBERO-Elegant tasks, comparing the base policy, Full-Guidance, and our JITI-guided variant. (b) Average Intervention Count per episode for Full-Guidance and JITI. JITI achieves higher ESR with significantly fewer interventions, demonstrating its efficiency and selectivity. 

all tasks and both base models. 

Table 1. Comprehensive comparison on the LIBERO-Elegant simulation benchmark. We report Elegant Success Rate (ESR, %). Full implementation details and hyperparameter settings for all compared methods are provided in Supp. C.                                                                

> Method T-0 T-1 T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 Avg.
> π0.5[10] 66 24 36 40 38 44 42 64 44.2 Isaac GR00T N1 [27] 50 42 48 36 36 30 24 56 40.2 SmolVLA (Base) [30] 70 30 34 52 50 42 48 72 49.8 Isaac GR00T N1.5 (Base) [27] 44 22 42 36 36 56 56 76 46.0
> Our Method (JITI-Guided)
> Ours (JITI) + SmolVLA 86 68 42 62 60 54 74 92 67.2 Ours (JITI) + GR00T N1.5 78 36 60 70 62 76 72 84 67.2

For SmolVLA , our method improves the average ESR from 49.8% to 67.2% (+17.4 pts). More importantly, our framework demonstrates strong “plug-and-play” capability: when integrated with the GR00T N1.5 model, it achieves a similar improvement from 46.0% to 67.2% (+21.2 pts). This confirms that our decoupled critic serves as a model-agnostic module capable of enhancing diverse VLA archi-tectures. 

5.3. Ablation Study (RQ2) 

To address RQ2: Component Contribution , we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mechanism by comparing three variants: the base policy without guidance, a Full-Guidance variant that applies N -sample evaluation at every timestep, and our pro-posed JITI model that triggers guidance only when critic uncertainty rises. As shown in Fig. 4(a), JITI consistently outperforms both baselines in Elegant Success Rate (ESR) across all eight tasks. At the same time, Fig. 4(b) shows that it re-duces the number of critic interventions by more than 60% compared to Full-Guidance, confirming that targeted, event-driven refinement can preserve efficiency while improving execution quality. 

Effect of Elegance-Oriented Reward Calibration. Be-yond temporal scheduling, we also examine how the elegance-oriented reward shaping contributes to stable and smooth policy behavior. To evaluate the contribution of our task-specific elegance signal, we train the Elegance Critic under two alternative re-ward schemes and compare the resulting inference perfor-mance. The first scheme ( Binary Reward ) provides only a sparse, end-of-episode success label; the second scheme is our proposed Task-Specific Reward , which supplies dense, intermediate supervision that explicitly encodes implicit task constraints. As shown in Table 2, the critic trained with the task-specific elegance rewards yields substantially higher ESR (67.2% vs. 56.8% on average). This gap indicates that sparse binary feedback is insufficient for learning the fine-grained preferences that define elegance: the dense, targeted reward enables the critic to distinguish and prefer subtle, high-quality execution patterns that binary success labels cannot reliably capture. We therefore conclude that effec-tive elegance refinement requires not only an uncertainty-aware intervention mechanism (JITI) but also an appropri-ately informative training signal for the critic. 

Table 2. Ablation on reward formulation in simulation. The proposed task-specific elegance reward yields higher ESR (%) ↑.

Reward Type T-0 T-1 T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 Avg. 

Binary Reward 72 66 34 56 28 44 60 94 56.8 

Task-Specific (Ours) 86 68 42 62 60 54 74 92 67.2 

5.4. Generalization (RQ3) 

Experimental Setup. To evaluate whether the Elegance Critic captures a transferable notion of motion quality, we conduct experiments on a set of pick-and-place tasks drawn from the LIBERO-Object suite. We split the LIBERO-Object tasks into a seen subset, used to train the critic on objects such as milk , ketchup , and 13514 alphabet soup , and an unseen subset containing novel but semantically similar tasks involving objects such as salad dressing , BBQ sauce , tomato sauce , and orange juice .This setup tests whether the critic generalizes its learned notion of “elegance” to unseen objects and spatial contexts while preserving the same high-level pick-and-place seman-tics. Detailed task specifications and evaluation conditions are provided in Supp. D. 

Results. As shown in Table 3, our method consistently im-proves the Elegant Success Rate (ESR) on both seen and un-seen tasks. Specifically, ESR rises from 54.6% to 72.0% on the seen tasks and from 53.0% to 68.6% on the unseen ones, demonstrating that the Elegance Critic learns a transferable behavioral prior rather than memorizing task-specific mo-tion patterns. This enables zero-shot refinement of motion quality across new manipulation contexts. 

Table 3. Generalization of the Elegance Critic to unseen tasks. 

The critic trained on three seen tasks is directly applied to four unseen but semantically similar manipulation tasks without fine-tuning. ESR (%) ↑                              

> Seen Tasks Method Seen-A Seen-B Seen-C –Avg. SmolVLA (Base) 62 48 54 –54.6
> Ours (JITI) + SmolVLA 80 62 74 –72.0 Unseen Tasks Method Unseen-A Unseen-B Unseen-C Unseen-D Avg. SmolVLA (Base) 60 54 46 52 53.0
> Ours (JITI) + SmolVLA 80 60 62 72 68.6

5.5. Real-World Validation 

To validate the real-world applicability of our JITI frame-work, we conducted experiments on a physical robotic plat-form, evaluating its robustness to the latency, uncertainty, and stochasticity inherent in real-world environments. 

Real-World Task Suite. We designed a suite of six manip-ulation tasks, each evaluated over 50 rollouts. The tasks were selected to assess both physical precision and be-havioral smoothness, key aspects of “elegant” execution. The suite covers common household scenarios, including drawer closing, object placing, and multi-object stacking of varying difficulty. Detailed task descriptions and evaluation criteria are provided in Supp. E. 

Experimental Setup. We deploy our system on a SO-100 

robotic arm using SmolVLA as the base policy. 

Results. Fig. 5 presents the averaged results across all tasks. The Base Policy (SmolVLA) achieves an average ESR of 34.3% across six real-world tasks. In contrast, Ours (JITI) improves the average ESR to 58.0% (+23.7 pts), showing consistent gains across all tasks. The largest im-provements occur on precision-demanding tasks such as stacking and placing, highlighting JITI’s effectiveness in re-fining motion quality under real-world uncertainty. Basket the Carrot      

> Stack Red on Green Plate the Bowl
> Plate the Corn
> Close Drawer
> Stack Blue on Yellow
> (a) Experiment Setup for Policy Evaluation
> 44
> 24 26
> 46
> 28
> 38 34.3
> 80
> 42
> 56
> 70
> 48 52
> 58 .0
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> Basket
> the
> Carrot
> Plate the
> Corn
> Stack
> Blue on
> Yellow
> Stack Red
> on Green
> Plate the
> Bowl
> Close
> Drawer
> Avg.
> (b) Real -world Experiment Results
> SmolVLA Ours(JITI)

Figure 5. Real-world validation on our six-task suite. (a) Task setups for the six tasks. (b) Elegant Success Rate (ESR %) of the 

Base Policy (SmolVLA) and Ours (JITI) .

These findings confirm that our framework not only en-hances manipulation quality in simulation but also trans-lates effectively to the real world. By leveraging critic feedback and temporal Q-value fluctuation, the proposed method provides a lightweight, training-free mechanism for improving motion elegance under real-world constraints. 

## 6. Conclusion 

In this work, we present a decoupled framework for refining elegant robotic manipulation from mixed-quality demon-strations. By combining an Elegance Critic with the Just-in-Time Intervention (JITI) mechanism, our approach se-lectively refines actions at decision-critical moments, im-proving execution quality without retraining the base policy. Extensive experiments on the LIBERO-Elegant benchmark and real-world robotic platforms show substantial gains in Elegant Success Rate (ESR) across diverse tasks and archi-tectures. These findings show that implicit execution qual-ity can be learned from demonstrations and applied during control, supporting generalization across varied tasks and promoting efficient and scalable quality-aware, human-like manipulation beyond success .13515 Acknowledgments 

This work was sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) through grant No. 52472448, and Deep Earth Probe and Mineral Resources Exploration-National Science and Technology Major Project through grants No. 2024ZD1000802 and No. 2024ZD1000804, and Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province through grant No. 20260205078GH, and Scientific and Techno-logical Research Project of the Education Department of Jilin Province through grant No. JJKH20261598KJ. We thank the above mentioned funds for their financial sup-port. 

## References 

[1] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control, 2024. 2 [2] Daniel S. Brown, Wonjoon Goo, and Scott Niekum. Better-than-demonstrator imitation learning via automatically-ranked demonstrations. In Proceedings of the 3rd Confer-ence on Robot Learning , 2019. 2 [3] Hanzhi Chen, Boyang Sun, Anran Zhang, Marc Pollefeys, and Stefan Leutenegger. Vidbot: Learning generalizable 3d actions from in-the-wild 2d human videos for zero-shot robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 27661–27672, 2025. 2 [4] Yuhui Chen, Shuai Tian, Shugao Liu, Yingting Zhou, Hao-ran Li, and Dongbin Zhao. Conrft: A reinforced fine-tuning method for vla models via consistency policy. ArXiv ,abs/2502.05450, 2025. 2 [5] Zengjue Chen, Runliang Niu, He Kong, and Qi Wang. Tgrpo :fine-tuning vision-language-action model via trajectory-wise group relative policy optimization. ArXiv ,abs/2506.08440, 2025. 2 [6] Zichen Jeff Cui, Yibin Wang, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafi-ullah, and Lerrel Pinto. From play to policy: Conditional be-havior generation from uncurated robot data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10047 , 2022. 2 [7] Maximilian Du, Suraj Nair, Dorsa Sadigh, and Chelsea Finn. Behavior retrieval: Few-shot imitation learning by querying unlabeled datasets. ArXiv , abs/2304.08742, 2023. 2 [8] Yanjiang Guo, Jianke Zhang, Xiaoyu Chen, Xiang Ji, Yen-Jen Wang, Yucheng Hu, and Jianyu Chen. Improving vision-language-action model with online reinforcement learning. 

2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-tomation (ICRA) , pages 15665–15672, 2025. 2 [9] Haifeng Huang, Xinyi Chen, Yilun Chen, Hao Li, Xiaoshen Han, Zehan Wang, Tai Wang, Jiangmiao Pang, and Zhou Zhao. Roboground: Robotic manipulation with grounded vision-language priors. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 22540– 22550, 2025. 2 [10] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Gal-liker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0.5: avision-language-action model with open-world generaliza-tion, 2025. 7, 3, 4 [11] Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline re-inforcement learning with implicit q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169 , 2021. 3 [12] Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 33:1179–1191, 2020. 3, 6 [13] Xuanlin Li, Kyle Hsu, Jiayuan Gu, Karl Pertsch, Oier Mees, Homer Rich Walke, Chuyuan Fu, Ishikaa Lunawat, Isabel Sieh, Sean Kirmani, et al. Evaluating real-world robot manipulation policies in simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05941 , 2024. 2, 1 [14] Ziniu Li, Tian Xu, Zeyu Qin, Yang Yu, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Imitation learning from imperfection: Theoretical justifica-tions and algorithms. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 2023. 2 [15] Zhiqi Li, Guo Chen, Shilong Liu, Shihao Wang, Vibashan VS, Yishen Ji, Shiyi Lan, Hao Zhang, Yilin Zhao, Sub-hashree Radhakrishnan, et al. Eagle 2: Building post-training data strategies from scratch for frontier vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14818 , 2025. 6[16] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maxi-milian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. ArXiv , abs/2210.02747, 2022. 4 [17] Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowl-edge transfer for lifelong robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03310 , 2023. 3, 1 [18] Jijia Liu, Feng Gao, Bingwen Wei, Xinlei Chen, Qingmin Liao, Yi Wu, Chao Yu, and Yu Wang. What can rl bring to vla generalization? an empirical study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19789 , 2025. 2 [19] Guanxing Lu, Wenkai Guo, Chubin Zhang, Yuheng Zhou, Hao Jiang, Zifeng Gao, Yansong Tang, and Ziwei Wang. Vla-rl: Towards masterful and general robotic manip-ulation with scalable reinforcement learning. ArXiv ,abs/2505.18719, 2025. [20] Jianlan Luo, Charles Xu, Jeffrey Wu, and Sergey Levine. Precise and dexterous robotic manipulation via human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning. ArXiv , abs/2410.21845, 2024. 2 [21] Andr´ es Marafioti, Orr Zohar, Miquel Farr´ e, Merve Noyan, Elie Bakouch, Pedro Cuenca, Cyril Zakka, Loubna Ben 13516 Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Nouamane Tazi, Vaibhav Srivastav, Joshua Lochner, Hugo Larcher, Mathieu Morlon, Lewis Tun-stall, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. Smolvlm: Redefining small and efficient multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05299 , 2025. 6 [22] Max Sobol Mark, Tian Gao, Georgia Gabriela Sampaio, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Archit Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and Aviral Kumar. Policy agnostic rl: Offline rl and online rl fine-tuning of any class and backbone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06685 , 2024. 2 [23] Cui Miao, Tao Chang, Meihan Wu, Hongbin Xu, Chun Li, Ming Li, and Xiaodong Wang. Fedvla: Federated vision-language-action learning with dual gating mixture-of-experts for robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 6904– 6913, 2025. 2 [24] Yao Mu, Tianxing Chen, Zanxin Chen, Shijia Peng, Zhiqian Lan, Zeyu Gao, Zhixuan Liang, Qiaojun Yu, Yude Zou, Mingkun Xu, Lunkai Lin, Zhiqiang Xie, Mingyu Ding, and Ping Luo. Robotwin: Dual-arm robot benchmark with gen-erative digital twins. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , pages 27649– 27660, 2025. 2, 1 [25] Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Simon Zhai, Anikait Singh, Max Sobol Mark, Yi Ma, Chelsea Finn, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Cal-ql: Calibrated offline rl pre-training for efficient online fine-tuning. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 36:62244–62269, 2023. 3, 5, 6 [26] Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Oier Mees, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Steering your generalists: Improving robotic foundation models via value guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13816 , 2024. 3 [27] NVIDIA, Nikita Cherniadev Johan Bjorck andFernando Casta˜ neda, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi ”Jim” Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, Joel Jang, Zhenyu Jiang, Jan Kautz, Kaushil Kundalia, Lawrence Lao, Zhiqi Li, Zongyu Lin, Kevin Lin, Guilin Liu, Edith Llon-top, Loic Magne, Ajay Mandlekar, Avnish Narayan, Soroush Nasiriany, Scott Reed, You Liang Tan, Guanzhi Wang, Zu Wang, Jing Wang, Qi Wang, Jiannan Xiang, Yuqi Xie, Yinzhen Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Seonghyeon Ye, Zhiding Yu, Ao Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yizhou Zhao, Ruijie Zheng, and Yuke Zhu. GR00T N1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. In ArXiv Preprint , 2025. 2, 7, 3, 4 [28] Allen Z. Ren, Justin Lidard, Lars Ankile, Anthony Sime-onov, Pulkit Agrawal, Anirudha Majumdar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Hongkai Dai, and Max Simchowitz. Diffusion policy policy optimization. ArXiv , abs/2409.00588, 2024. 2[29] Junyang Shu, Zhiwei Lin, and Yongtao Wang. Rftf: Re-inforcement fine-tuning for embodied agents with temporal feedback. ArXiv , abs/2505.19767, 2025. 2 [30] Mustafa Shukor, Dana Aubakirova, Francesco Capuano, Pepijn Kooijmans, Steven Palma, Adil Zouitine, Michel Ar-actingi, Caroline Pascal, Martino Russi, Andr´ es Marafioti, Simon Alibert, Matthieu Cord, Thomas Wolf, and R´ emi Cad` ene. Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for af-fordable and efficient robotics. ArXiv , abs/2506.01844, 2025. 7, 3, 5 [31] Chan Hee Song, Valts Blukis, Jonathan Tremblay, Stephen Tyree, Yu Su, and Stan Birchfield. Robospatial: Teaching spatial understanding to 2d and 3d vision-language models for robotics. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition Conference , pages 15768–15780, 2025. 2 [32] Haoming Song, Delin Qu, Yuanqi Yao, Qizhi Chen, Qi Lv, Yiwen Tang, Modi Shi, Guanghui Ren, Maoqing Yao, Bin Zhao, et al. Hume: Introducing system-2 thinking in visual-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21432 ,2025. 3 [33] Shuhan Tan, Kairan Dou, Yue Zhao, and Philipp Kr¨ ahenb¨ uhl. Interactive post-training for vision-language-action models. ArXiv , abs/2505.17016, 2025. 2 [34] Voot Tangkaratt, Bo Han, Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan, and Masashi Sugiyama. Vild: Variational imitation learning with diverse-quality demonstrations. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019. 2 [35] Yunke Wang, Chang Xu, Bo Du, and Honglak Lee. Learning to weight imperfect demonstrations. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10961–10970. PMLR, 2021. 3 [36] Kun Wu, Ning Liu, Zhen Zhao, Di Qiu, Jinming Li, Zheng-ping Che, Zhiyuan Xu, Qinru Qiu, and Jian Tang. Learn-ing from imperfect demonstrations with self-supervision for robotic manipulation. 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 16899–16906, 2024. 2 [37] Wenke Xia, Ruoxuan Feng, Dong Wang, and Di Hu. Phoenix: A motion-based self-reflection framework for fine-grained robotic action correction. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 6981–6990, 2025. 3 [38] Charles Xu, Qiyang Li, Jianlan Luo, and Sergey Levine. Rldg: Robotic generalist policy distillation via reinforcement learning, 2024. 2 [39] Haoran Xu, Xianyuan Zhan, Honglei Yin, and Huiling Qin. Discriminator-weighted offline imitation learning from sub-optimal demonstrations. In Proceedings of the 39th Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pages 24725– 24742, 2022. 2 [40] Hongyin Zhang, Zifeng Zhuang, Han Zhao, Pengxiang Ding, Hongchao Lu, and Donglin Wang. Reinbot: Amplify-ing robot visual-language manipulation with reinforcement learning. ArXiv , abs/2505.07395, 2025. 3 [41] Shiduo Zhang, Zhe Xu, Peiju Liu, Xiaopeng Yu, Yuan Li, Qinghui Gao, Zhaoye Fei, Zhangyue Yin, Zuxuan Wu, Yu-Gang Jiang, et al. Vlabench: A large-scale benchmark for language-conditioned robotics manipulation with long-horizon reasoning tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 11142– 11152, 2025. 2 [42] Enshen Zhou, Qi Su, Cheng Chi, Zhizheng Zhang, Zhongyuan Wang, Tiejun Huang, Lu Sheng, and He Wang. Code-as-monitor: Constraint-aware visual programming for reactive and proactive robotic failure detection. In Proceed-13517 ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Con-ference , pages 6919–6929, 2025. 3 [43] Weijie Zhou, Manli Tao, Chaoyang Zhao, Haiyun Guo, Honghui Dong, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. Physvlm: Enabling visual language models to understand robotic phys-ical reachability. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 6940–6949, 2025. 2 [44] Konrad Zolna, Alexander Novikov, Ksenia Konyushkova, Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Yusuf Aytar, Misha Denil, Nando De Freitas, and Scott Reed. Offline learning from demonstrations and unlabeled experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13885 , 2020. 3 13518