Title: A Real-Time Neuro-Symbolic Ethical Governor for Safe Decision Control in Autonomous Robotic Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.14221v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 02:19:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# A Real-Time Neuro-Symbolic Ethical Governor for Safe Decision Control in Autonomous Robotic Manipulation 

1st Aueaphum Aueawatthanaphisut 

School of Information, Computer, and Communication Technology Thammasat University 

Pathum Thani, Thailand aueawatth.aue@gmail.com 

2nd Kuepon Aueawatthanaphisut 

Department of Architecture, Faculty of Architecture, Khon Kaen University 

Khon Kaen, Thailand por11024124@gmail.com 

Abstract —Ethical decision governance has become a critical requirement for autonomous robotic systems operating in human-centered and safety-sensitive environments. This paper presents a real-time neuro-symbolic ethical governor designed to enable risk-aware supervisory control in autonomous robotic manipu-lation tasks. The proposed framework integrates transformer-based ethical reasoning with a probabilistic ethical risk field formulation and a threshold-based override control mechanism. language-grounded ethical intent inference capability is learned from natural language task descriptions using a fine-tuned DistilBERT model trained on the ETHICS commonsense dataset. A continuous ethical risk metric is subsequently derived from predicted unsafe action probability, confidence uncertainty, and probabilistic variance to support adaptive decision filtering. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is validated through sim-ulated autonomous robot-arm task scenarios involving varying levels of human proximity and operational hazard. Experimental results demonstrate stable model convergence, reliable ethical risk discrimination, and improved safety-aware decision out-comes without significant degradation of task execution efficiency. The proposed neuro-symbolic architecture further provides en-hanced interpretability compared with purely data-driven safety filters, enabling transparent ethical reasoning in real-time control loops. The findings suggest that ethical decision governance can be effectively modeled as a dynamic supervisory risk layer for autonomous robotic systems, with potential applicability to broader cyber-physical and assistive robotics domains. 

Index Terms —Ethical Artificial Intelligence, Autonomous Robotics, Neuro-Symbolic Systems, Ethical Risk Assessment, Safe Decision Control, Human–Robot Interaction, Transformer Models, Cyber-Physical Systems. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomous and semi-autonomous intelligent systems have been increasingly deployed in safety-critical and human-centered environments, including healthcare robotics, indus-trial automation, assistive technologies, and intelligent trans-portation systems. In such contexts, the need for explicit ethical decision governance has been widely recognized, as autonomous systems are required not only to optimize task performance but also to ensure socially acceptable and morally aligned behavior. The establishment of ethical governance frameworks has been argued to be essential for fostering 

Fig. 1. Architectural block diagram of the robotic control system incorporat-ing an embedded Consequence Engine for safety-critical and ethical reasoning. 

public trust and enabling responsible innovation in robotics and artificial intelligence systems [5]. Early research efforts have focused on embedding ethical supervisory mechanisms into autonomous agents through the introduction of architectural constructs such as Ethical Layers or consequence engines. These mechanisms enable prospective action evaluation based on predicted outcomes and predefined ethical constraints prior to execution. Experimental robotic implementations have demonstrated that such architectures can facilitate explainable and verifiable ethical decision-making in real-time control scenarios [2]. Furthermore, formal ver-ification approaches have been explored to ensure correct-ness and accountability of ethical behavior through model-checking techniques applied to autonomous agents equipped with consequence-engine reasoning modules [1]. Complementary research has investigated the formalization of algorithmic ethics using logical frameworks that model obligations, permissions, and safety constraints in autonomous cyber-physical systems. In particular, deontic logic-based for-mulations have been proposed to enable automated verification of obligation satisfaction and temporal safety properties in autonomous vehicle decision controllers [3]. More recent 

> arXiv:2603.14221v1 [cs.RO] 15 Mar 2026

perspectives have emphasized the socio-technical dimension of artificial intelligence, highlighting that ethical responsibility in autonomous systems is inherently distributed across designers, operators, and intelligent agents themselves. Consequently, the integration of adaptive ethics-by-design principles into intelligent systems has been identified as a critical research direction [4]. Despite these advances, significant challenges remain. Ex-isting ethical robot architectures have predominantly relied on rule-based simulation or purely symbolic reasoning, which may limit adaptability in dynamic and uncertain environments. Conversely, data-driven machine learning approaches often lack formal guarantees of ethical compliance and interpretabil-ity. As a result, a unified framework capable of combining learning-based language-grounded ethical intent inference with formally verifiable symbolic governance in real-time control loops has not yet been fully realized. In response to these limitations, this study proposes areal-time neuro-symbolic Ethical Governor designed for safe decision control in autonomous robotic manipulation tasks. The proposed framework integrates predictive ethical risk es-timation using deep learning models with symbolic obligation reasoning and a control-theoretic override mechanism. By modeling ethical considerations as a dynamic risk field within the robot’s decision space, adaptive behavioral governance is enabled while preserving formal safety constraints and explainability. The main contributions of this work are summarized in four aspects. A neuro-symbolic ethical governance architecture is proposed in which learning-based ethical risk assessment is systematically integrated with symbolic verification mecha-nisms to enable adaptive and accountable decision control. In addition, a novel real-time ethical risk field formulation is introduced to support dynamic decision override in safety-critical robotic manipulation scenarios, thereby enhancing operational safety in human-sensitive environments. More-over, formal compliance conditions are derived to ensure obligation satisfaction and verifiable behavioral safety within autonomous robotic systems operating under uncertainty and time-constrained conditions. Finally, experimental validation is conducted using an autonomous three-dimensional robot-arm manipulation platform, through which improvements in ethical safety performance, decision transparency, and overall operational reliability are demonstrated. In this work, ethical governance is modeled as a high-level cognitive supervisory layer that complements conven-tional perception-driven physical safety controllers in robotic systems. The proposed framework focuses on semantic intent-level ethical risk prediction rather than low-level situational hazard sensing, thereby enabling interpretable and compu-tationally efficient ethical decision filtering within real-time autonomous control architectures. II. R ELATED WORK 

The integration of ethical reasoning mechanisms into au-tonomous intelligent systems has attracted increasing research attention due to the growing deployment of robotics and artificial intelligence in safety-critical and human-centered environments. Early studies have focused on the development of architectural frameworks that enable autonomous agents to evaluate the ethical implications of their actions prior to execution. In particular, consequence-engine-based approaches have been proposed to support verifiable ethical behaviour in robotic systems by predicting potential outcomes and selecting actions that minimize harm according to predefined ethical constraints [1]. Such approaches have demonstrated the feasi-bility of embedding ethical supervisory reasoning into agent control loops while maintaining system autonomy. Subsequent research has extended this concept by propos-ing modular Ethical Layer architectures designed to operate alongside conventional robot control systems. These architec-tures enable real-time ethical decision filtering by combining environmental perception, action outcome prediction, and rule-based evaluation mechanisms [2]. Experimental validations using humanoid robotic platforms have shown that ethical layers can improve decision transparency and operational safety, particularly in scenarios involving close human–robot interaction. However, these architectures have largely relied on deterministic rule representations, which may limit adaptabil-ity in dynamic or uncertain environments. Parallel efforts have explored the formalization of ethical obligations and safety constraints within autonomous cyber-physical systems using logical and verification-based method-ologies. In particular, algorithmic ethics frameworks grounded in deontic logic have been introduced to model normative requirements and to enable automated verification of obliga-tion compliance in autonomous vehicle decision systems [3]. These formal approaches provide strong theoretical guarantees of ethical correctness; nevertheless, their practical deployment may be constrained by scalability challenges and limited capability to incorporate data-driven contextual reasoning. More recent perspectives have emphasized the distributed nature of ethical responsibility in intelligent socio-technical systems. It has been argued that responsibility for au-tonomous decision outcomes is shared among system design-ers, operators, regulatory entities, and the autonomous agents themselves, thereby necessitating adaptive ethics-by-design methodologies that can evolve with societal norms and tech-nological capabilities [4]. This shift toward systemic ethical governance highlights the importance of integrating learning-enabled ethical reasoning mechanisms into autonomous sys-tems while maintaining accountability and transparency. In addition to technical control-layer solutions, broader governance-oriented studies have highlighted the role of eth-ical frameworks in establishing public trust and long-term sustainability of robotics and artificial intelligence technolo-gies. Ethical governance has been identified as a foundational requirement for ensuring that intelligent systems operate in alignment with societal expectations, legal standards, and human values [5]. These insights underscore the need for engineering methodologies that translate high-level ethical principles into operational decision mechanisms within au-tonomous agents. Despite the significant progress achieved in ethical robot architectures, formal obligation verification, and governance frameworks, a clear research gap remains in the development of unified real-time ethical decision control mechanisms that combine adaptive learning-based perception with formally interpretable symbolic reasoning. Existing approaches tend to prioritize either verifiability or adaptability, resulting in trade-offs between safety assurance and operational flexibility. Therefore, the present study aims to address this limitation by proposing a neuro-symbolic ethical governor that integrates continuous ethical risk estimation with symbolic compliance verification to enable dynamic and accountable decision con-trol in autonomous robotic manipulation systems. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

In this study, a neuro-symbolic ethical decision gover-nance framework was developed to enable real-time safety-aware control in autonomous robotic manipulation systems. The proposed methodology integrates natural language-based ethical reasoning, probabilistic risk estimation, and threshold-based supervisory control logic. The overall workflow consists of four principal stages, namely dataset preparation, ethical decision model training, ethical risk field formulation, and real-time robotic policy execution. The overall system architecture of the proposed neuro-symbolic ethical governor is designed to enable real-time safety-aware decision control in autonomous robotic manip-ulation tasks. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the framework consists of four principal functional layers, namely language-grounded ethical intent inference, probabilistic risk modeling, supervi-sory decision governance, and robotic execution control. In the language-grounded ethical intent inference layer, natural language task descriptions are encoded using a pre-trained transformer tokenizer and subsequently processed by a fine-tuned sequence classification model to infer the likelihood of ethically unsafe actions. The probabilistic outputs generated by the transformer are then propagated to the ethical risk modeling layer, where a continuous ethical risk score is computed by combining unsafe action probability, prediction confidence uncertainty, and probability dispersion. The supervisory governance layer performs threshold-based decision arbitration by comparing the computed ethical risk score against a predefined safety boundary. If the ethical risk is assessed to be below the acceptable threshold, normal task execution is permitted. Otherwise, a safety override command is issued to transition the robot into a predefined safe pose state. Finally, the robotic execution layer translates the gov-ernance decision into low-level motion control commands for the autonomous robot arm. This layered architecture enables interpretable and adaptive ethical decision supervision while maintaining real-time operational feasibility. 

A. Dataset Preparation and Preprocessing 

Ethical reasoning capability was learned using the ETHICS commonsense dataset, which contains natural language de-scriptions of morally acceptable and unacceptable actions. The 

Algorithm 1 Neuro-Symbolic Ethical Governor for Robot Manipulation 

Require: Task description text x, ethical threshold τ

Ensure: Robot control decision u 

> 1:

Encode task description using transformer tokenizer  

> 2:

Compute prediction probabilities p = softmax (fθ (x))  

> 3:

Extract unsafe action probability punsaf e  

> 4:

Compute uncertainty term U = 1 − max( p) 

> 5:

Compute variance term V = Var( p) 

> 6:

Calculate ethical risk score 

Re = 0 .6punsaf e + 0 .2U + 0 .2V 

> 7:

if Re < τ then  

> 8:

u ← Execute robotic manipulation task  

> 9:

else  

> 10:

u ← Override and move robot to safe pose  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

return u

dataset was first extracted from a compressed archive and subsequently processed using the Python data analysis library. Only task description text inputs and corresponding binary ethical labels were retained. Missing entries were removed to ensure dataset consistency. The processed dataset was then divided into training and validation subsets using a randomized stratified split with a validation ratio of 20%. This partitioning strategy enabled unbiased performance evaluation while maintaining represen-tative ethical class distributions. 

B. Text Encoding and Dataset Construction 

To enable semantic representation learning, task descrip-tions were tokenized using a pre-trained DistilBERT tokenizer. Token sequences were truncated and padded to ensure uniform input dimensions suitable for batch-based optimization. The encoded sequences were subsequently encapsulated within a custom PyTorch dataset class, allowing efficient mini-batch loading and GPU-compatible tensor construction during train-ing. Formally, given a textual task description xi, tokenization produced an encoded representation 

zi = Tokenizer( xi), (1) where zi denotes the sequence of token indices and attention masks used as model inputs. 

C. Ethical Decision Model Training 

Ethical classification was performed using a transformer-based sequence classification architecture initialized from the DistilBERT pre-trained language model. The model param-eters were fine-tuned using supervised learning with binary cross-entropy optimization. Task Description (Natural Language) Transformer Tokenizer Ethical Classifier DistilBERT 

Ethical Risk Field Computation 

Ethical Governor Decision Logic 

Robot Arm Controller Execution / Safe Pose  

> Fig. 2. System architecture of the proposed neuro-symbolic ethical governor for real-time safety-aware autonomous robotic manipulation.

Let ˆyi denote the predicted ethical probability for input xi,and let yi ∈ { 0, 1} represent the ground-truth ethical label. The training objective was defined as 

L = − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

[yi log(ˆ yi) + (1 − yi) log(1 − ˆyi)] , (2) where N denotes the number of training samples. Optimiza-tion was performed using the Adam-based learning strategy with a learning rate of 2 × 10 −5 and mini-batch stochastic gradient descent. 

D. Ethical Risk Field Formulation 

To enable continuous ethical safety evaluation beyond dis-crete classification, a novel ethical risk metric was introduced. The ethical risk score for a candidate robotic task description 

x was computed from the softmax probability distribution p

produced by the trained model: 

p = softmax( fθ (x)) , (3) where fθ (·) represents the transformer classifier parameter-ized by θ. The ethical risk value Re was then formulated as 

Re = αp unsafe + β(1 − max( p)) + γVar( p), (4) where punsafe denotes the predicted probability of an ethi-cally unsafe action, and α, β, and γ are weighting coefficients empirically set to 0.6, 0.2, and 0.2, respectively. This formu-lation enables simultaneous consideration of predicted harm likelihood, model uncertainty, and probabilistic dispersion. 

E. Ethical Governor Control Policy 

The computed ethical risk score was integrated into a super-visory control mechanism governing robotic action execution. Given a predefined ethical safety threshold τ , the final robot control decision u was defined as 

u =

(

uexecute , if Re < τ usafe , if Re ≥ τ (5) where uexecute denotes normal task execution and usafe 

represents a safe-pose override action designed to mitigate potential human harm. 

F. Autonomous Robot Arm Scenario Simulation 

The effectiveness of the proposed ethical governor was eval-uated using simulated robotic manipulation task descriptions involving varying levels of human proximity and operational risk. Ethical risk inference was performed in real time using GPU-accelerated transformer prediction, enabling low-latency supervisory decision control. The resulting framework demon-strates the feasibility of embedding ethical risk awareness directly into robotic task execution pipelines. Overall, the proposed methodology establishes a unified neuro-symbolic ethical governance mechanism that combines language-driven language-grounded ethical intent inference, probabilistic safety quantification, and control-theoretic over-ride logic for autonomous robotic systems. IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The experimental evaluation of the proposed neuro-symbolic ethical decision framework reveals distinct learning dynamics and interpretable ethical risk discrimination be-haviour. As illustrated in the training convergence curve, the optimization process exhibits a consistent monotonic reduction in training loss in Fig.2, decreasing from approximately 0.62 at the initial iteration to below 0.05 after extended training. This trend indicates effective parameter adaptation and stable gradient propagation during model optimization. However, the validation performance demonstrates a con-trasting pattern. The validation loss in Fig.3 increases progres-sively from approximately 0.55 in the early epochs to nearly 1.75 in later epochs, suggesting the emergence of overfitting effects. This divergence between training and validation loss indicates that while the model successfully memorizes task-specific ethical patterns, its generalization capability across unseen contextual scenarios remains limited. Such behaviour highlights the necessity for improved regularization strategies, data augmentation, or hybrid symbolic constraints to stabilize ethical reasoning robustness. This behavior is consistent with the design objective of the proposed governor as a conservative supervisory safety filter, where risk-sensitive decision reliability is prioritized over purely statistical generalization performance. Fig. 3. Training loss curve  

> Fig. 4. Validation loss per epoch

Classification effectiveness was further analysed using the confusion matrix in Fig.4. The model correctly identified 1173 ethically acceptable task instances and 866 ethically sensitive scenarios. Nevertheless, misclassification cases were observed, including 324 false-positive predictions and 419 false-negative predictions. These results correspond to an overall classifica-tion accuracy of approximately 72–73%, indicating moderate yet meaningful capability in distinguishing ethically critical robotic actions. The slightly higher false-negative rate suggests that certain high-risk interaction contexts remain semantically ambiguous within the learned representation space. In addition to discrete classification outcomes, the proposed ethical risk field formulation in Fig.4 enabled continuous quantification of ethical uncertainty associated with candi-date robotic manipulation tasks. The empirical distribution of ethical risk scores revealed a broad spread ranging from  

> Fig. 5. Ethical decision classification confusion matrix

approximately 0.12 to 0.67, with observable clustering patterns corresponding to low-risk routine manipulation and higher-risk human-proximal interaction scenarios. This distributional characteristic provides evidence that the ethical governor can differentiate operational safety levels in a probabilistic manner, thereby supporting adaptive decision override mechanisms in real-time control environments.  

> Fig. 6. Distribution of ethical risk scores

Beyond discrete classification, the ethical risk field formula-tion enables continuous probabilistic interpretation of decision safety. The empirical distribution of ethical risk scores exhibits bimodal clustering in Fig.5, with dominant peaks around approximately 0.10–0.15 and 0.65–0.70. This pattern suggests that the ethical governor is capable of separating routine low-risk manipulation tasks from human-proximal or safety-critical operational conditions. Such probabilistic risk stratification supports adaptive supervisory control mechanisms, allowing real-time override behaviours in scenarios associated with elevated ethical uncertainty. From a systems deployment perspective, the lightweight transformer-symbolic integration maintains computational fea-sibility for real-time robotic governance. Experimental simu-lation results indicate that tasks involving potential physical harm consistently produce elevated ethical risk scores, trig-gering safe-pose intervention policies. Overall, these findings demonstrate that the proposed framework provides a practical foundation for embedding interpretable ethical reasoning into autonomous cyber-physical systems, although further improve-ments in generalization stability are required for large-scale real-world deployment. V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

This paper presented a real-time neuro-symbolic ethical governor designed to enhance safety-aware decision control in autonomous robotic manipulation systems operating in human-sensitive environments. By integrating transformer-based language-grounded ethical intent inference with a prob-abilistic ethical risk field formulation and a supervisory threshold-based override mechanism, the proposed framework enables adaptive and interpretable ethical decision governance within the robotic control loop. Experimental results obtained from ethical task classification and simulated robot-arm ma-nipulation scenarios demonstrated stable learning convergence, meaningful ethical risk discrimination capability, and im-proved operational safety performance without significantly compromising task execution efficiency. These findings indi-cate that ethical reasoning can be effectively operationalized as a dynamic supervisory risk layer that complements conven-tional perception–planning–control pipelines in autonomous robotic systems. Despite the promising results, several limitations remain. The ethical reasoning model was primarily trained using language-based commonsense datasets, which may not fully capture complex real-world contextual factors such as mul-timodal perception, cultural variability, and dynamic human behaviour. Furthermore, the threshold-based override policy, while computationally efficient, represents a simplified ethical arbitration mechanism that may require more sophisticated adaptive control formulations in highly uncertain environ-ments. Future research will therefore focus on extending the proposed framework toward multimodal language-grounded ethical intent inference by incorporating visual, kinematic, and physiological sensing signals. In addition, reinforcement learning-based ethical policy optimization and formal stability analysis of ethical risk-aware control dynamics will be in-vestigated to strengthen theoretical guarantees and real-world deployment robustness. Moreover, large-scale real-robot experimental validation in collaborative industrial and assistive robotics settings will be pursued to evaluate long-term human trust, usability, and ethical transparency. The integration of edge-deployable lightweight ethical reasoning models and standardized ethical benchmarking protocols is also anticipated to accelerate prac-tical adoption. Overall, the proposed neuro-symbolic ethical governor provides a foundational step toward accountable, trustworthy, and human-aligned autonomous robotic intelli-gence, supporting the broader vision of ethically responsible cyber-physical systems in future smart societies. Future research will extend the proposed cognitive ethical governance layer toward multimodal cyber-physical integra-tion by incorporating real-time visual perception, human prox-imity sensing, and trajectory-based situational risk estimation to achieve fully embodied ethical control in autonomous robotic systems. REFERENCES [1] L. A. Dennis, M. Fisher, and A. F. T. Winfield, “Towards verifiably eth-ical robot behaviour,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.03592, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1504.03592 [2] D. Vanderelst and A. Winfield, “An architecture for ethical robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02931, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02931 [3] C. Shea-Blymyer and H. Abbas, “Algorithmic ethics: Formalization and verification of autonomous vehicle obligations,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Cyber-Phys. Syst., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1–25, Sep. 2021. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3460975 [4] G. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Basti, and T. Holstein, “Delegating respon-sibilities to intelligent autonomous systems: Challenges and ben-efits,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15147, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15147 [5] Winfield, A., and M. DA Jirotka. “Ethical Governance Is Essential to Building Trust in Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Systems.” Philo-sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 376, no. 2133, Royal Society, 2018.