Title: The Price Is Not Right: Neuro-Symbolic Methods Outperform VLAs on Structured Long-Horizon Manipulation Tasks with Significantly Lower Energy Consumption

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.19260v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Feb 2026 02:04:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# The Price Is Not Right: Neuro-Symbolic Methods Outperform VLAs on Structured Long-Horizon Manipulation Tasks with Significantly Lower Energy Consumption 

Timothy Duggan 1, Pierrick Lorang 1,2, Hong Lu 1, and Matthias Scheutz 1,∗

Abstract — Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have re-cently been proposed as a pathway toward generalist robotic policies capable of interpreting natural language and visual inputs to generate manipulation actions. However, their effec-tiveness and efficiency on structured, long-horizon manipulation tasks remain unclear. In this work, we present a head-to-head empirical comparison between a fine-tuned open-weight VLA model ( π0) and a neuro-symbolic architecture that combines PDDL-based symbolic planning with learned low-level control. We evaluate both approaches on structured variants of the Towers of Hanoi manipulation task in simulation while mea-suring both task performance and energy consumption during training and execution. On the 3-block task, the neuro-symbolic model achieves 95% success compared to 34% for the best-performing VLA. The neuro-symbolic model also generalizes to an unseen 4-block variant (78% success), whereas both VLAs fail to complete the task. During training, VLA fine-tuning consumes nearly two orders of magnitude more energy than the neuro-symbolic approach. These results highlight important trade-offs between end-to-end foundation-model approaches and structured reasoning ar-chitectures for long-horizon robotic manipulation, emphasizing the role of explicit symbolic structure in improving reliability, data efficiency, and energy efficiency. Code and models are available at https://price-is-not-right.github.io 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models are gaining at-tention in robotics due to their ability to interpret natural language task instructions in conjunction with visual inputs to produce manipulation actions. Such models are often viewed as a pathway toward generalist robotic policies that can be adapted to a variety of tasks. However, their suitability for structured, long-horizon manipulation problems remains unclear, particularly when considering the substantial com-putational and energy costs associated with fine-tuning and deployment. To evaluate whether the use of VLAs is justified in this setting, we conduct a head-to-head comparison between a state-of-the-art open-weight VLA model, π0 (OpenPi) [1], and a recently published neuro-symbolic architecture that combines a high-level PDDL-based symbolic planner with diffusion-based low-level control [2]. This alternative model 

*This work was in part supported by ONR grant #N00014-24-1-2024. 

> 1

Human-Robot Interaction Lab, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA. 

{timothy.duggan, pierrick.lorang, hong.lu663424, matthias.scheutz }@tufts.edu 

> 2

AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Center for Vision, Automation & Control, Vienna, Austria. 

pierrick.lorang@ait.ac.at 

Fig. 1. Overview of the experimental comparison between VLA models and the NSM. Both receive identical sensory inputs from simulation. VLAs produce actions conditioned on either a high-level task description or planner guidance, while the NSM plans symbolically and executes via learned policies. Power and energy are monitored during training and inference. 

leverages the interpretability and structured reasoning ca-pabilities of symbolic methods alongside the adaptive and continuous control advantages offered by neural network-based approaches. We designed a “Towers of Hanoi” manip-ulation task within the Robosuite simulation environment to benchmark multi-step robotic manipulation capabilities com-prehensively. Both approaches are trained from programmat-ically generated demonstrations with the same observation and action modalities. Importantly, we evaluate two VLA configurations: an end-to-end model and a planner-guided variant. The end-to-end VLA is not provided with explicit task rules or symbolic structure; instead, it must infer relevant constraints from demonstration data alone. The planner-guided VLA is fine-tuned to execute subtasks under the guidance of an external planner, allowing us to isolate execution performance from planning quality. Our evaluation focuses on task performance, energy con-sumption, and generalization to task variations. We record training time, CPU/GPU utilization, and total energy us-age for both approaches. The results show that, in this structured long-horizon setting, the neuro-symbolic model 

> arXiv:2602.19260v1 [cs.RO] 22 Feb 2026

achieves substantially higher task success while consuming significantly less energy than the VLA model. These find-ings suggest that for structured manipulation tasks requir-ing sequential reasoning, explicitly incorporating symbolic structure can provide significant performance and efficiency advantages. While this benchmark focuses on a structured manipu-lation domain, it provides a controlled setting for analyz-ing performance–efficiency trade-offs between architectural paradigms. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Vision-Language-Action Models 

Recent advancements in end-to-end robotics foundational models have aimed at enabling robots to generalize across tasks, environments and morphologies. VLA models, in particular, integrate vision, language, and control capabilities through large scale pre-training on robot demonstration data with the potential of providing generalist robot policies [3]. Similarly, after rigorous evaluation of multitask robot ma-nipulation policies, recent findings suggest that multitask pretraining can improve the success rate and robustness of policies while speeding up the learning of new tasks [4]. Several recent VLA models have explored distinct aspects of multi-modal integration. Kim et al. introduce OpenVLA , a model designed for generalized task planning and execution through large-scale training on paired vision-action data [5]. 

UniVLA by Bu et al. expands on this by employing aunified architecture to handle a broader range of tasks across multiple robot morphologies and environments, emphasizing versatility and adaptability [6]. NVIDIA’s GR00T model fur-ther advances these ideas by integrating a dual system design where a vision-language module and a diffusion transformer module are trained together for tight coupling between the two [7]. Physical Intelligence’s π0 focuses on dexterous manipulation and has an action chunking architecture with flow matching that enables high frequency control [1]. However, questions remain regarding the generalization capabilities of current VLAs. Current VLA models fre-quently fail when faced with complex, out-of-distribution, or multi-step tasks [8]. For instance, Zhang et al. highlight that 

OpenVLA struggles with generalization, skill transfer, and long-horizon planning [9]. In addition to these performance limitations, current VLA research rarely reports detailed measurements of computational and energy costs associated with deployment, particularly on embedded robotic systems. 

B. Neuro-symbolic Approaches for Task and Motion Plan-ning 

Neuro-symbolic approaches have been widely studied as a way to integrate high-level symbolic reasoning with low-level continuous control, particularly in “Task and Motion Planning” (TAMP) domains [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. These systems often rely on structured symbolic rep-resentations and action operators, which can be manually specified or learned from demonstrations [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], enabling long-horizon behavior while maintain-ing interpretability and modularity. Logic-based formalisms, such as Answer Set Programming (ASP), have also been used to extract symbolic models from raw data, reducing supervision requirements though typically assuming discrete state and action abstractions [21], [22]. Historically, these neuro-symbolic architectures demon-strate the feasibility of structured, interpretable planning and control in data-efficient settings [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [12], [28]. These developments highlight how agents can achieve long-horizon, modular, and interpretable behavior while remaining data-efficient, providing a strong historical baseline for analyzing the computational and energy trade-offs of modern VLAs. Among the recent works, the ap-proach by Lorang et al. [2] provides a practical example of a neuro-symbolic system capable of co-learning both symbolic domains and low-level policies from very few demonstrations. This method illustrates how agents can plan and act efficiently in structured environments without relying on large-scale pretraining, making it a suitable baseline for comparison with VLAs in terms of computational and energy cost. 

C. Preliminaries: Neuro-Symbolic Planning-Diffusion Mod-els 

Symbolic Planning. Symbolic planning builds upon a formal domain description σ = ⟨E , F, S, O⟩ , where E is a set of entities, F a set of boolean or numerical predicates over entities, S a set of symbolic states formed by grounded predicates, and O a set of operators. Each operator o ∈ O is defined by preconditions ψ and effects ω over predicates. A grounded operator ˆo binds objects to parameters and can be applied if its preconditions hold, updating the state according to its effects. A planning task T = ( E, F, O, s 0, s g ) seeks a plan P = [ o1, . . . , o |P| ] that transitions from initial state s0

to goal state sg [29]. 

Diffusion Imitation Learning (IL). Imitation learning (IL) aims to learn a policy π(˜ s) from expert demonstrations 

{(˜ st, a t, ˜st+1 )}Tt=0 , where ˜st denotes a continuous state, at

the expert action, and ˜st+1 the resulting state. The policy is trained by minimizing the mean squared error between predicted and expert actions: L(π) = 1

> T

PTt=0 ∥π(˜ st)−at∥2.

Unlike reinforcement learning, IL bypasses exploration and reward engineering, providing a more data-efficient way to acquire complex behaviors directly from demonstrations. Diffusion policies [30] are imitation learning methods for continuous control that adapt diffusion models from generative modeling to policy learning. Expert actions are perturbed with Gaussian noise during training, and a denois-ing network ϵθ is optimized to recover the original actions conditioned on the state. At inference, the learned reverse process iteratively refines noisy samples to generate actions, yielding a stochastic policy pθ (at | st).

Neuro-Symbolic Architecture. Neuro-symbolic architec-tures combine symbolic reasoning with neural control. A planner solves a STRIPS task T = ⟨E , F, O, s 0, s g ⟩ to produce a plan P = [ o1, . . . , o |P| ], where each operator oi is refined into a neural skill πi ∈ Π. Each skill πi interacts with the environment to realize the operator’s effects ωi,transitioning the system from a state s to a new state s′. This layered approach enables flexible execution in continuous spaces while maintaining high-level task abstraction. III. C OMPARING STATE -OF -THE -A RT VLA AND 

NEURO -S YMBOLIC MODELS 

A. Fine-tuning the Vision Language Action Model 

π0 was selected as a representative open-weight VLA model with publicly available fine-tuning infrastructure. Two separate checkpoints were created using LoRA fine-tuning: one End-to-End (E2E-VLA) and one Planner-Guided (PG-VLA). More details on each can be found in Sec. IV-D. LoRA fine-tunings were performed for 30k steps on our custom dataset using the default hyperparameters provided in the official OpenPi fine-tuning scripts to ensure repro-ducibility. 1 PaliGemma 2B LoRA was chosen as the vision-language backbone and Gemma 300M LoRA was chosen for the action header. The exact configuration can be seen in our repository. 

B. Inference with the Vision Language Action Model 

Inference was performed inside the docker container pro-vided by π0. Robosuite was added to the container to access our custom environment. For both E2E-VLA and PG-VLA, progress is tracked using detectors in the simulation. E2E-VLA’s command, “Play Towers of Hanoi”, remains constant throughout the episodes. PG-VLA receives its next command after successfully completing its current command. If the VLA does not progress to the next sub-task within 750 steps, the episode is terminated. 

C. Planning 1) VLA latent space: E2E-VLA uses its latent space planning to determine the moves it takes. 

2) VLM: Since the π0 team uses VLMs to break high-level tasks down into low-level language commands, we evaluate three VLMs on their ability to generate plans as sequences of pick-and-place language commands for the Towers of Hanoi tasks. The three VLMs evaluated are GPT-5, Qwen, and PaliGemma [31], [32], [33]. We access GPT-5 through the OpenAI API. We download and evaluate Qwen and PaliGemma locally on a GPU machine. The Qwen variant used is Qwen2.5-7b-VL-Instruct. This variant has 7 billion parameters and has been trained to produce output in the instructed format. The PaliGemma variant used is PaliGemma-3b-mix-448 variant. This variant has 3 billion parameters and has been trained on a variety of vision 

> 1At the time of our experiments, the official OpenPi fine-tuning pipeline included a delta-action transformation enabled by default in the released training scripts. This transform is intended for datasets containing absolute action targets. Although our dataset already consisted of relative (delta) actions, we retained the default configuration to remain consistent with the provided checkpoint and training code. All reported VLA results reflect this setting. Subsequent updates to the OpenPi codebase have modified this default behavior. We verified that disabling this transform does not qualitatively alter the performance trends reported in this work.

language tasks. Each VLM takes in an initial image of the Towers of Hanoi task, a goal image, and a prompt explaining the environment and the rules of Towers of Hanoi. The VLMs are prompted to output a sequence of pick or place natural language commands separated by the new line character. To isolate execution performance from planning quality, the planner-guided VLA is evaluated using valid, optimal plans. 

D. Neuro-symbolic Architecture 

We utilize prior work demonstrating that neuro-symbolic models can be learned from few demonstrations [2] to construct our neuro-symbolic model (NSM) which com-bines PDDL-based symbolic planning with low-level con-trols. When performing the task, the model first generates a high-level plan using the symbolic planner, detects the object pose and then executes each step by using a trained diffusion policy. All diffusion policies operate on relative pose observations–object poses expressed with respect to the end effector–and output end-effector displacement ac-tions. To keep the input modalities the same as those of VLAs, the NSM receives only images and proprioceptive information. Both the high-level planning domain and the low-level controls are learned directly from demonstrations. The NSM learns symbolic abstractions and low-level policies from demonstrations without manually specified task rules or pre-defined action schemas. 

Symbolic Abstraction. From raw demonstration trajec-tories D, we extract node transitions τ node = (n, l, n ′),where n and n′ are high-level states and l is a human-assigned label. These transitions form a graph G = ⟨V, E, L ⟩

whose nodes represent abstract states and edges represent skills. To compact the structure, we compute a minimal bisimulation ¯G, removing redundant states while preserving equivalence. Using an ASP-based solver [21], [34], we infer a symbolic domain σ = ⟨E , F, S, O⟩ in PDDL form. This yields a symbolic abstraction of the demonstrations suitable for classical planning. 

Object detection. To ensure comparability with VLA in-puts, the NSM also takes as input images and proprioceptive data rather than object-space information, which was used in prior work [2]. Specifically, we train a YOLOv8 [35] bounding-box detector combined with a lightweight gradient boosting regressor to estimate 3D object poses from two camera views: a static camera and a wrist-mounted camera on the end effector. These are the same two cameras used by the VLAs. These estimate poses, combined with propriocep-tive data, are then used to compute relative transformations between the end effector and detected objects and fed as inputs to the control policies. 

Training Controls. Each operator oi ∈ O is associated with a neural policy πi trained from its demonstration segments. Inspired by the options framework [36], we further decompose each skill into action-step sub-policies πi,j with termination conditions. To ensure sample efficiency, we filter observations through a task-relevant feature selector ϕ that selects only operator-relevant objects Eoi and expresses them in coordinates relative to the end effector. Policies are trained using diffusion models [30], which capture multi-modal action distributions and improve robustness. 

Execution of the Framework. At test time, the user specifies an initial and goal state, which are mapped into a PDDL planning instance T = ⟨E , F, O, s 0, s g ⟩. A classical planner (MetricFF [37]) computes an abstract plan P =[o1, . . . , o |P| ]. Each operator oi is realized by invoking its policy πi, which internally sequences action-step controllers 

πi,j until their learned termination conditions are met. This hierarchical composition enables generalization to variations within the task domain, solving long-horizon TAMP prob-lems from few demonstrations. IV. E VALUATION METHODOLOGY 

For the model comparison, we were particularly inter-ested in determining performance under both task-based and energy-based measures. Task-based measures include successful task completion rates as well as generalization to novel task variations not encountered during training. Energy-based measures include energy expenditure during fine-tuning and training, as well as during inference. In addition, we evaluated three VLMs which were used to break down the problem into atomic pick-and-place actions for the VLA on their energy expenditure and plan correctness. 

A. Hardware 

All fine-tuning, training, inference, and experiments were performed on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 with 24GB of memory. GPU Power consumption metrics were measured using Weights & Biases [38]. CPU power con-sumption was measured by accessing the RAPL logs. Idle GPU power averaged approximately 25 W and idle CPU power approximately 2.5 W. Idle power consumption was included in all reported measurements to reflect total system-level energy usage during training and inference. Power usage was logged periodically during execution and training. Due to variability in logging intervals imposed by the monitoring framework, reported energy values were computed by numerically integrating measured power over recorded timestamps. 

B. Simulation and Experimental Environment 

All simulations were performed in Robosuite in the table-top environment designed for the robot to perform a mod-ified version of Towers of Hanoi as seen in Fig. 1. We used blocks instead of discs, and rectangular areas instead of rods to reduce manipulation failures. The blocks are numbered; higher numbers indicated “larger blocks”. Blocks have different sizes, as well as different colors per block size. The experiments are performed in three different task environments: 1) Individual Move: A basic pick and place task where the agent must place a single block onto another designated block or area. This serves as the simplest benchmark for object manipulation. 2) Three-block Towers of Hanoi: Each episode begins with a tower of three blocks stacked on the left  

> Fig. 2. Example observations from the dataset. Left: Agent-view RGB image. Right: Wrist-mounted camera RGB image.

platform. The goal is to reconstruct the tower on the right platform while respecting the constraint that a larger block can never be placed on top of a smaller one. 3) Four-block Towers of Hanoi: The most challenging variant, where the task starts with all four blocks stacked on the left platform. The agent must transfer the complete tower to the right platform under the same size-ordering constraint. The robot platform used in our experiments is the Franka Panda . We selected this robot because the π0 model, which we employ as a baseline, was originally trained and fine-tuned on the LIBERO simulation benchmark using the same platform. This choice ensures that our evaluation environ-ments remain closely aligned with those used to train the 

π0 checkpoint, even prior to its fine-tuning on our specific tasks. 

C. Training Data 

Training data was automatically generated using a Python script that controlled the robot using scripted grasp-and-place primitives to complete Towers of Hanoi tasks. 

VLA Training Dataset. We collected a dataset of 300 

episodes, which can be found on the paper’s website. The first 150 episodes consist of full Towers of Hanoi runs with a random selection of 3 out of the 4 possible blocks. The remaining 150 episodes begin from random valid con-figurations of blocks placed on different platforms, while respecting the rules of the task. In both cases, block positions on the platforms were varied in the x, y plane according to a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of 1 cm. 

NSM Training Dataset . The NSM training data was substantially smaller: only 50 demonstrations of randomly sampled Stacking tasks (pick and place pairs) were used. Importantly, the NSM never directly observes a Towers of Hanoi resolution during demonstrations; instead, it infers the rules and symbolic planning domain from these sim-pler stacking demonstrations. Each demonstration consists of (images, proprioception, action) sequences, along with a high-level linkage of nodes between demonstrations (see [2] for technical details). We used the same random sampling as for the VLA training data. Although the VLA is trained on full task trajectories while the NSM is trained only on stacking demonstrations, both datasets share identical sensory and action formats. The primary methodological difference lies in how each architecture leverages its training data: the NSM explicitly abstracts symbolic structure from partial demonstrations, whereas the VLA must implicitly infer such structure from complete trajectories. Here is the overall demonstration data we provide to all agents.  

> •

image (256,256,3) : RGB image from the Robo-suite agentview camera. See Fig. 2  

> •

wrist image (256,256,3) : RGB image from the Panda’s wrist camera. See Fig. 2  

> •

state (8,) : The grippers position, orientation (axis angle), and finger positions.  

> •

actions (7,) : Robosuite OSC POSE controller ac-tion (dx, dy, dz, droll, dpitch, dyaw, gripper)  

> •

task (string) : The natural language command (VLA specific)  

> •

task (node transitions) : Feasible transitions between Stacking tasks (NSM specific) The following shows the Natural Language Sub-Task Formats present in the training dataset:  

> •

Pick the [ blue / red / green / yellow ] block.  

> •

Place the [ blue / red / green / yellow ] block in the [ left 

/ middle / right ] area.  

> •

Place the [ blue / red / green / yellow ] block on the [ blue 

/ red / green / yellow ] block. 

D. Baselines 

We evaluated the following models: 

End-to-End VLA (E2E-VLA): A vision-language-action model fine-tuned on the training datasets using a single high-level command, “Play Towers of Hanoi”, applied at every frame of the training episodes. This model learns the task as a monolithic sequence without explicit decomposition into sub-tasks and does not use any external planning mechanism. 

Planner-Guided VLA (PG-VLA): A vision-language-action model fine-tuned on our datasets using structured sub-task commands (see Sec. IV-C), in combination with an external planner. This approach decomposes the overall task into smaller natural language sub-goals, enabling stepwise guidance during execution. We separate the planning perfor-mance from the acting performance evaluations, and consider that PG-VLA always has access to the optimal plan to isolate execution performance from planning quality. 

Neuro-Symbolic Model (NSM): A baseline method that learns both high-level symbolic planning and low-level con-tinuous control directly from demonstrations [2]. The NSM extracts abstract operators and builds a PDDL domain from a small number of demonstrations, executing the task by sequencing learned neural policies according to the planned operator sequence. 

E. Metrics for Comparison 

We evaluated the performance of all agents on both short-horizon ( Individual Moves ) and long-horizon tasks ( 3-block and 4-block Towers of Hanoi ). For planning, we computed the number of optimal, suboptimal, and invalid plans over 50 episodes. For the E2E-VLA agent, planning performance was inferred indirectly by observing task advancement relative to the optimal plan. In contrast, for the PG-VLA agent and the NSM agent, we directly analyzed the output plans produced by the VLM-based planner and the classical PDDL planner, respectively. Task progress was monitored using a detector function implemented solely for evaluation; agents had no access to this detector. Runs exceeding 750 time steps–approximately double the maximum number of steps observed in successful training trajectories–were considered failures and terminated. Overall success rate, incorporating both planning and execution, was used as the primary perfor-mance metric. The Individual Move task evaluates a single pick-and-place action extracted from the 3-block Towers of Hanoi sequence, isolating low-level execution performance independent of long-horizon planning. To assess both utility and efficiency, we additionally recorded energy-based metrics. For model training and fine-tuning, we compared total GPU energy consumption, mean GPU power, mean CPU utilization, and overall training time. During execution and inference, we measured mean GPU and CPU utilization per task, mean execution episode dura-tion, and task progression rates (e.g., fraction of sub-tasks successfully completed at each step). These metrics allow evaluating not only task success but also the computational and energy cost of each approach. V. R ESULTS 

A. Energy Consumption 1) Fine-tuning & Training: Table I reports the power and energy consumption and training times of our models. Each VLA LoRA fine-tune took over 1.5 days to complete whereas the NSM completed training in 34 minutes. The VLA LoRA fine-tunes also had about 50 W higher average power consumption than NSM training. The VLA LoRA fine-tunes consumed nearly two orders of magnitude more energy than NSM training. 

2) Inference & Execution: Table II reports power and energy consumption during evaluation. Both E2E-VLA and PG-VLA require GPU-backed inference, whereas the NSM does not. Although VLAs use roughly twice the CPU power of the NSM, their total power exceeds 5× due to GPU usage. Across all tasks except 4-block Towers of Hanoi, VLA episode energy is approximately an order of magnitude higher than that of the NSM. The 4-block case is an exception because episodes terminate early under the 750-step progress threshold, resulting in shorter runtimes and reduced accumulated energy. Despite total power being only about 5× greater, VLAs also require roughly 2× longer per episode on individual block stacking tasks. Since energy scales with both power and time, this longer execution further amplifies the per-episode energy gap. Episodes are terminated if no progress is made within 750 steps. Consequently, less successful models—particularly the VLA variants—often have shorter episode durations, which TABLE I TRAINING HARDWARE METRICS COMPARING VLA L ORA FINE -TUNING                                                                             

> (E2E-VLA, PG-VLA) AND NSM TRAINING . B EST VALUES IN EACH ROW ARE BOLDED .
> Metric E2E-VLA PG-VLA NSM
> Time 1d 16h 26m 1d 15h 42m 34m
> GPU Metrics
> Mean Util. (%) 100 100 100 Mean Power (W) 423.6 409.1 316.5
> Energy (MJ) 61.7 58.5 0.65
> CPU Metrics
> Mean Util. (%) 3.12 3.13 10.5 Mean Power (W) 46.6 44.7 97.7 Energy (MJ) 6.8 6.4 0.2 Total Energy (MJ) 68.5 64.9 0.85
> TABLE II POWER ,ENERGY CONSUMPTION ,AND TASK PERFORMANCE FOR
> TOWERS OF HANOI EXPERIMENTS . A LL VALUES ARE AVERAGED OVER
> 50 EVALUATION EPISODES . NSM DOES NOT USE A GPU.
> Setting Metric E2E-VLA PG-VLA NSM
> All Tasks GPU Power (W) 72.4 70.8 0
> CPU Power (W) 42.8 43.2 19.4
> Total Power (W) 115.2 114.0 19.4
> Individual Move Success (%) 87.0 59.6 99.0
> Duration (s) 13.8 12.4 6.3
> Energy (kJ) 1.59 1.41 0.12
> 3-Block Hanoi Success (%) 34.0 0.0 95.0
> Advancement (%) 49.6 23.9 97.3
> Episode Energy (kJ) 7.96 6.94 0.83
> 4-Block Hanoi Success (%) 0.0 0.0 78.0
> Advancement (%) 2.5 3.6 84.4
> Episode Energy (kJ) 5.77 4.96 1.44

partially influences the observed differences in per-episode energy between E2E-VLA and PG-VLA. 

B. Task Performance 1) Individual Moves: The NSM achieved an almost per-fect success rate of 99% in this task of picking and placing a single block. The E2E-VLA had a 87.0% success rate and the PG-VLA had a 59.6% success rate. We will discuss the disparity between the task performance of the E2E-VLA and the PG-VLA later. The NSM also completed individual move tasks in about half the time of the E2E-VLA. The E2E-VLA had even worse speed performance with a mean duration of 13.8 seconds. 

2) 3-Block Towers of Hanoi: For the 3-block version of Towers of Hanoi, the NSM achieved a success rate of 95%. The E2E-VLA completed 34% of the games and the PG-VLA did not complete a single game. We also look at Task Advancement Rate which is the mean percentage of the task a model completed. The NSM had a task advancement rate               

> TABLE III PLANNING ACCURACY OF VLM-BASED PLANNERS OVER 50
> EVALUATION TASKS .
> Metric GPT-5 Qwen (7B) PaLI-Gemma (3B)
> Optimal (%) 84 00Suboptimal (%) 000Invalid (%) 16 100 100

of the 97.3%. The E2E-VLA had a Task Advancement Rate of 49.6% with a bimodal distribution of task advancement. Many episodes failed early having only succeeded in the first 4 of 14 sub-tasks. Generally, episodes that made it past sub-task 4 tended to complete the whole task, with only a few exceptions. The PG-VLA had a task success rate of 0% and an advancement rate of 23.9%. Many of the episodes failed on sub-task 3 or 5 of 14. The PG-VLA’s farthest progression was sub-task 9 of 14. None achieved sub-task 10. The low task performance rates of the VLA models are particularly noteworthy because the evaluation configuration was included in their training data, hence one would expect to see a high performance. 

3) 4-Block Towers of Hanoi: For the 4-block version of Towers of Hanoi which was not part of the training data, the NSM achieved a success rate of 78% and a task advancement rate of 84.4%. Both VLAs failed to complete a single game. Their task advancement rates were also very low. Both VLAs appeared to execute the trajectory for the 3-block Towers of Hanoi game which is not too surprising in the case of the E2E-VLA because it has never seen a 4-block Towers of Hanoi in its training data and cannot generalize on its own. However, PG-VLA was given the proper instructions and still was not able to execute them. The models were supposed to pick the top block and place it on the middle platform. In the 3-block Towers of Hanoi task, the first move is to place that block on the right platform. The only successful instances of sub-task 2 occurred when the block was inadvertently released while passing over the middle platform. 

4) VLM Planners: We queried each VLM with 10 pairs of initial and goal images per Towers of Hanoi configuration. The results reported in Table III summarize the 50 plans produced for the five tower configurations of Hanoi. The GPU and CPU usages in Table IV are averaged across the 50 queries. Note that GPT-5 GPU and CPU stats were not accessible as GPT-5 is not open source. GPT-5 far outperformed Qwen and PaliGemma in producing valid and optimal plans. However, since GPT-5 is much larger than the other two models, we expect that its energy expenditure is substantially larger. These results indicate that VLMs are not reliable and energy-efficient planners. This is consistent with Kambhampati’s finding that large language models cannot reliably plan [39] Overall, VLAs draw substantially higher power due to GPU usage, and longer episode durations further increase per-episode energy. We next examine whether this added cost TABLE IV PER -QUERY LATENCY AND HARDWARE USAGE FOR VLM-BASED PLANNERS (MEAN OVER 50 QUERIES ). GPU/CPU STATISTICS ARE UNAVAILABLE FOR GPT-5 (API). L OWER IS BETTER ; BEST IN BOLD .                           

> Metric GPT-5 Qwen (7B) PaLI-Gemma (3B)
> Latency (s) 63.1 1.83 0.22
> GPU metrics per query
> Util. (%) –14.3 4.65 Power (W) –105.8 92.9
> Energy (J) –193.6 20.4
> CPU metrics per query
> Util. (%) –5.00 5.48 Power (W) –41.3 38.0
> Energy (J) –75.6 8.4
> Total Energy (J) –269.2 28.8

yields improved task performance. VI. D ISCUSSION 

The neuro-symbolic model outperforms the fine-tuned VLAs on the Towers of Hanoi task in both task success and energy consumption. It also generalizes to the 4-block variant despite not being trained on it, demonstrating robustness on structured, multi-step manipulation. The poor performance of PG-VLA in the 3-block task, even compared to E2E-VLA, was unexpected. In the origi-nal π0 work [1], VLM-based task decomposition improved long-horizon execution. We verified that the PG-VLA was provided valid plans using commands from its training data. One possible explanation is that the diversity within each command category reduced execution fidelity, whereas the E2E-VLA partially memorized the full 3-block trajectory. While generalization to the 4-block task was not expected for E2E-VLA, PG-VLA also failed to generalize despite receiving correct instructions. The VLA success rate of 34% on the 3-block task high-lights persistent challenges for end-to-end models on struc-tured long-horizon problems. In our experiments, failures were primarily due to low-level execution errors rather than complete breakdowns in task sequencing. The VLA often retried missed grasps but repeatedly failed to accurately reach target poses, suggesting sensitivity to trajectory quality and variation within the training data. In particular, diversity introduced through randomized block substitutions and spa-tial perturbations may have reduced the model’s ability to execute precise movements reliably. Although VLA performance depends on data and hyperpa-rameters, closing the observed performance gap would likely still leave substantial energy and training-time differences. The NSM was trained on fewer demonstrations (50 stack-ing tasks) than the VLA (300 Hanoi games) yet achieved near-perfect performance and better generalization through explicit domain structure. Overall, the results highlight important architectural trade-offs for structured long-horizon tasks. While VLAs provide flexible end-to-end learning, they remain sensitive to tra-jectory quality and incur significant computational overhead during fine-tuning and inference. For domains with explicit procedural constraints, such as industrial assembly or rule-based manipulation, neuro-symbolic architectures that ex-plicitly represent task structure may provide practical advan-tages in reliability, data efficiency, and energy consumption. While this comparison focuses on a structured benchmark, the computational demands of VLAs during fine-tuning and execution remain substantial and may limit their practicality in many robotic settings. Because VLA policies require GPU-backed inference, their per-episode energy cost com-pounds under repeated deployment, potentially amplifying the practical gap observed in our experiments. These find-ings suggest that continued investigation of hybrid neuro-symbolic architectures remains well motivated. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented a comprehensive empirical comparison be-tween fine-tuned Vision-Language-Action models and aneuro-symbolic architecture on a structured long-horizon robotic manipulation task. In the 3-block Towers of Hanoi benchmark, the neuro-symbolic approach achieved a 95% success rate compared to 34% for the best-performing VLA, while consuming nearly two orders of magnitude less energy during training. The neuro-symbolic model also generalized to the unseen 4-block variant (78% success), whereas both VLAs failed to complete a single episode. These results highlight important trade-offs between end-to-end foundation-model approaches and structured reason-ing architectures. For manipulation tasks governed by ex-plicit procedural constraints, incorporating symbolic struc-ture can yield substantial advantages in reliability, data efficiency, and energy consumption. We hope this work encourages more careful consideration of performance–efficiency trade-offs when selecting archi-tectures for robotic manipulation. REFERENCES [1] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, L. X. Shi, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, and U. Zhilinsky, “π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24164 [2] P. Lorang, H. Lu, J. Huemer, P. Zips, and M. Scheutz, “Few-shot neuro-symbolic imitation learning for long-horizon planning and acting,” no. arXiv:2508.21501, Aug. 2025, arXiv:2508.21501 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21501 [3] Y. Hu, Q. Xie, V. Jain, J. Francis, J. Patrikar, N. Keetha, S. Kim, Y. Xie, T. Zhang, H.-S. Fang, S. Zhao, S. Omidshafiei, D.-K. Kim, A. akbar Agha-mohammadi, K. Sycara, M. Johnson-Roberson, D. Batra, X. Wang, S. Scherer, C. Wang, Z. Kira, F. Xia, and Y. Bisk, “Toward general-purpose robots via foundation models: A survey and meta-analysis,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08782 [4] T. L. Team, J. Barreiros, A. Beaulieu, A. Bhat, R. Cory, E. Cousineau, H. Dai, C.-H. Fang, K. Hashimoto, M. Z. Irshad, M. Itkina, N. Kuppuswamy, K.-H. Lee, K. Liu, D. McConachie, I. McMahon, H. Nishimura, C. Phillips-Grafflin, C. Richter, P. Shah, K. Srinivasan, B. Wulfe, C. Xu, M. Zhang, A. Alspach, M. Angeles, K. Arora, V. C. Guizilini, A. Castro, D. Chen, T.-S. Chu, S. Creasey, S. Curtis, R. Denitto, E. Dixon, E. Dusel, M. Ferreira, A. Goncalves, G. Gould, D. Guoy, S. Gupta, X. Han, K. Hatch, B. Hathaway, A. Henry, H. Hochsztein, P. Horgan, S. Iwase, D. Jackson, S. Karamcheti, S. Keh, J. Masterjohn, J. Mercat, P. Miller, P. Mitiguy, T. Nguyen, J. Nimmer, Y. Noguchi, R. Ong, A. Onol, O. Pfannenstiehl, R. Poyner, L. P. M. Rocha, G. Richardson, C. Rodriguez, D. Seale, M. Sherman, M. Smith-Jones, D. Tago, P. Tokmakov, M. Tran, B. V. Hoorick, I. Vasiljevic, S. Zakharov, M. Zolotas, R. Ambrus, K. Fetzer-Borelli, B. Burchfiel, H. Kress-Gazit, S. Feng, S. Ford, and R. Tedrake, “A careful examination of large behavior models for multitask dexterous manipulation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05331 [5] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Kollar, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, D. Sadigh, S. Levine, P. Liang, and C. Finn, “Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09246 [6] Q. Bu, Y. Yang, J. Cai, S. Gao, G. Ren, M. Yao, P. Luo, and H. Li, “Univla: Learning to act anywhere with task-centric latent actions,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06111 [7] NVIDIA, :, J. Bjorck, F. Casta˜ neda, N. Cherniadev, X. Da, R. Ding, L. J. Fan, Y. Fang, D. Fox, F. Hu, S. Huang, J. Jang, Z. Jiang, J. Kautz, K. Kundalia, L. Lao, Z. Li, Z. Lin, K. Lin, G. Liu, E. Llontop, L. Magne, A. Mandlekar, A. Narayan, S. Nasiriany, S. Reed, Y. L. Tan, G. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Xiang, Y. Xie, Y. Xu, Z. Xu, S. Ye, Z. Yu, A. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Zheng, and Y. Zhu, “Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14734 [8] P. Guruprasad, H. Sikka, J. Song, Y. Wang, and P. P. Liang, “Benchmarking vision, language, and action models on robotic learning tasks,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.05821 [9] S. Zhang, Z. Xu, P. Liu, X. Yu, Y. Li, Q. Gao, Z. Fei, Z. Yin, Z. Wu, Y.-G. Jiang, and X. Qiu, “Vlabench: A large-scale benchmark for language-conditioned robotics manipulation with long-horizon reasoning tasks,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.18194 [10] L. Steccanella and A. Jonsson, “State representation learning for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning,” arXiv:2205.01965 , 2022. [11] R. Karia and S. Srivastava, “Relational abstractions for generalized reinforcement learning on symbolic problems,” arXiv , p. 2204, 2022. [12] H. Kokel, A. Manoharan, S. Natarajan, B. Ravindran, and P. Tadepalli, “Reprel: Integrating relational planning and reinforcement learning for effective abstraction,” in ICAPS , May 2021. [13] L. Guan, S. Sreedharan, and S. Kambhampati, “Leveraging approxi-mate symbolic models for reinforcement learning via skill diversity,” 

arXiv:2202.02886 , 2022. [14] N. Kumar, W. McClinton, R. Chitnis, T. Silver, T. Lozano-P´ erez, and L. P. Kaelbling, “Learning operators with ignore effects for bilevel planning in continuous domains,” arXiv:2208.07737 , 2022. [15] C. R. Garrett, C. Paxton, T. Lozano-P´ erez, L. P. Kaelbling, and D. Fox, “Online replanning in belief space for partially observable task and motion problems,” in ICRA , 2020. [16] G. Konidaris, L. P. Kaelbling, and T. Lozano-Perez, “From skills to symbols: Learning symbolic representations for abstract high-level planning,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , vol. 61, p. 215–289, Jan. 2018. [17] S. Manschitz, J. Kober, M. Gienger, and J. Peters, “Learning to sequence movement primitives from demonstrations,” 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , p. 4414–4421, Sep. 2014. [18] F. Yang, D. Lyu, B. Liu, and S. Gustafson, “Peorl: Integrating symbolic planning and hierarchical reinforcement learning for robust decision-making,” 07 2018, pp. 4860–4866. [19] K. Pertsch, Y. Lee, Y. Wu, and J. J. Lim, “Demonstration-guided reinforcement learning with learned skills,” Jul. 2021. [20] P. Lorang, S. Goel, Y. Shukla, P. Zips, and M. Scheutz, “A framework for neurosymbolic goal-conditioned continual learning in open world environments,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , Oct. 2024, p. 12070–12077. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10801627 [21] B. Bonet and H. Geffner, “Learning first-order symbolic representa-tions for planning from the structure of the state space,” Santiago de Compostela , 2020. [22] I. D. Rodriguez, B. Bonet, J. Romero, and H. Geffner, “Learning first-order representations for planning from black-box states: New results,” 

CoRR , vol. abs/2105.10830, 2021. [23] A. K. Tanwani, A. Yan, J. Lee, S. Calinon, and K. Goldberg, “Se-quential robot imitation learning from observations,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 40, no. 10–11, p. 1306–1325, Sep. 2021. [24] Y. Zhu, P. Stone, and Y. Zhu, “Bottom-up skill discovery from unsegmented demonstrations for long-horizon robot manipulation,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 2, p. 4126–4133, Apr. 2022. [25] S. Teng, L. Chen, Y. Ai, Y. Zhou, Z. Xuanyuan, and X. Hu, “Hi-erarchical interpretable imitation learning for end-to-end autonomous driving,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , vol. 8, no. 1, p. 673–683, Jan. 2023. [26] N. Kumar, W. McClinton, R. Chitnis, T. Silver, T. Lozano-P´ erez, and L. P. Kaelbling, “Learning efficient abstract planning models that choose what to predict,” no. arXiv:2208.07737, Sep. 2023, arXiv:2208.07737 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.07737 [27] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137 [28] P. Lorang, H. Lu, and M. Scheutz, “Curiosity-driven imagination: Discovering plan operators and learning associated policies for open-world adaptation,” no. arXiv:2503.04931. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Mar. 2025, arXiv:2503.04931 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04931 [29] D. McDermott, M. Ghallab, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, A. Ram, M. Veloso, D. Weld, and D. Wilkins, “PDDL - The Planning Domain Definition Language,” 1998. [30] C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” in 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [31] OpenAI, “GPT-5,” https://openai.com/gpt-5/, 2025. [32] S. Bai, K. Chen, X. Liu, J. Wang, W. Ge, S. Song, K. Dang, P. Wang, S. Wang, J. Tang, H. Zhong, Y. Zhu, M. Yang, Z. Li, J. Wan, P. Wang, W. Ding, Z. Fu, Y. Xu, J. Ye, X. Zhang, T. Xie, Z. Cheng, H. Zhang, Z. Yang, H. Xu, and J. Lin, “Qwen2.5-vl technical report,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13923 [33] L. Beyer, A. Steiner, A. S. Pinto, A. Kolesnikov, X. Wang, D. Salz, M. Neumann, I. Alabdulmohsin, M. Tschannen, E. Bugliarello, T. Unterthiner, D. Keysers, S. Koppula, F. Liu, A. Grycner, A. Gritsenko, N. Houlsby, M. Kumar, K. Rong, J. Eisenschlos, R. Kabra, M. Bauer, M. Boˇ snjak, X. Chen, M. Minderer, P. Voigtlaender, I. Bica, I. Balazevic, J. Puigcerver, P. Papalampidi, O. Henaff, X. Xiong, R. Soricut, J. Harmsen, and X. Zhai, “Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07726 [34] I. D. Rodriguez, B. Bonet, J. Romero, and H. Geffner, “Learning First-Order Representations for Planning from Black Box States: New Results,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning , 11 2021, pp. 539–548. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24963/kr.2021/51 [35] G. Jocher, J. Qiu, and A. Chaurasia, “Ultralytics YOLO,” Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics [36] R. S. Sutton, D. Precup, and S. Singh, “Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning,” 

Artificial Intelligence , 1999. [37] J. Hoffmann, “The metric-ff planning system: Translating“ignoring delete lists”to numeric state variables,” Journal of artificial intelligence research , vol. 20, pp. 291–341, 2003. [38] L. Biewald, “Experiment tracking with weights and biases,” 2020, software available from wandb.com. [Online]. Available: https://www.wandb.com/ [39] S. Kambhampati, K. Valmeekam, L. Guan, M. Verma, K. Stechly, S. Bhambri, L. Saldyt, and A. Murthy, “Llms can’t plan, but can help planning in llm-modulo frameworks,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01817