Title: Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.23408v1

Published Time: Mon, 02 Mar 2026 01:03:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

Yuchun Feng * 1 Jinliang Zheng * 1 2 Zhihao Wang 1 3 Dongxiu Liu 1 Jianxiong Li 1 Jiangmiao Pang 2

Tai Wang 2 Xianyuan Zhan 1

## Abstract 

The specification of the action space plays a piv-otal role in imitation-based robotic manipulation policy learning, fundamentally shaping the op-timization landscape of policy learning. While recent advances have focused heavily on scaling training data and model capacity, the choice of action space remains guided by ad-hoc heuristics or legacy designs, leading to an ambiguous un-derstanding of robotic policy design philosophies. To address this ambiguity, we conducted a large-scale and systematic empirical study, confirming that the action space does have significant and complex impacts on robotic policy learning. We dissect the action design space along temporal and spatial axes, facilitating a structured analysis of how these choices govern both policy learnability and control stability. Based on 13,000+ real-world rollouts on a bimanual robot and evaluation on 

500+ trained models over four scenarios, we ex-amine the trade-offs between absolute vs. delta representations, and joint-space vs. task-space parameterizations. Our large-scale results sug-gest that properly designing the policy to predict delta actions consistently improves performance, while joint-space and task-space representations offer complementary strengths, favoring control stability and generalization, respectively. 

## 1. Introduction 

Learning-based robotic manipulation policies have achieved remarkable progress in recent years, evolving from simple pick-and-place to dexterous, precision-critical tasks (Bro-han et al., 2022; 2023a; Chi et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Jang et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2025b). While recent ad-vances largely focus on scaling training data and model 

> *

Equal contribution 1Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 2Shanghai AI Lab 3Peking University. Corre-spondence to: Tai Wang <taiwang.me@gmail.com >, Xianyuan Zhan <zhanxianyuan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn >.

Preprint. March 2, 2026. 

capacity (NVIDIA et al., 2025; Black et al., 2025; Lin et al., 2025a), the specification of action space , which is the un-derlying interface bridging neural predictions and physical hardware, remains an overlooked yet critical determinant of success. As the primary supervision signal, the choice of action representation governs not only the learnability of the policy but also the stability of deployment (Eßer et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2025a). Subtle changes in this interface can drastically alter the optimization landscape, or even distin-guish a robust policy from one that fails to generalize (Chi et al., 2023). Although important, as illustrated in Figure 1(a), the re-search community still has no consensus on the best prac-tices of action space design over the past years. Histori-cally, end-effector pose was favored for its semantic sim-plicity (Liu et al., 2024), yet recent trends have pivoted toward joint-space representations to bypass the numerical instabilities of inverse kinematics (Black et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). Crucially, the design space extends far beyond simple spatial parameterization. It also involves a combi-natorial explosion of choices, including temporal represen-tation (absolute vs. relative) and prediction horizons (e.g., action chunking). Currently, the field lacks a consensus or a unified understanding to navigate through these numer-ous choices. Researchers often rely on ad-hoc heuristics or legacy configurations inherited from different codebases, leading to a fragmented landscape where ”state-of-the-art” results are often conflated with specific, undocumented con-trol choices (Bjorck et al., 2025). Such ambiguity not only impedes reproducibility but also hampers the development of foundation models capable of cross-embodiment transfer. Addressing this ambiguity is crucial for guiding the de-sign of future robotic manipulation policies. While prior works (Chi et al., 2023; Eßer et al., 2024) have provided some initial insights, deriving comprehensive and reliable guidance for action space selection remains a non-trivial challenge. The difficulty stems from the substantial hetero-geneity of robotic learning settings, the limited fidelity of simulation environments, and the high cost of real-world robotic evaluation. Consequently, existing studies are often limited in their empirical scope and lack systematic compar-isons. As the field advances toward large-scale generalist robot models (Team et al., 2025), the cost of suboptimal 1 

> arXiv:2602.23408v1 [cs.RO] 26 Feb 2026 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies
> Figure 1. Overview of our study on action space design. (a) Historical analysis shows the divergent usage of action spaces (Absolute vs. Delta, Joint vs. EEF) in existing literature. (b) Our experimental setup includes an action abstraction taxonomy and a large-scale benchmark on both simulation and real-world platforms. We invest over 13,000 real-world rollouts to quantify the impact of these design choices, revealing significant performance gaps and identifying best practices for robotic manipulation under various scenarios.

control interface design becomes increasingly consequen-tial, underscoring the need for principled and unified design guidelines. To bridge this gap, we present the first large-scale, systematic empirical study that investigates how ac-tion space design impacts robotic policy learning. We begin by formalizing and dissecting action space design along two orthogonal axes: a temporal axis (absolute vs. delta parame-terization, action chunking) and a spatial axis (joint-space vs. task-space control). We investigate how these design choices induce fundamental trade-offs between policy learn-ability, control stability, and deployment performance. Building on this foundation, we conduct a comprehen-sive, large-scale experimental study across three platforms: the recently advanced simulation RoboTwin-2.0 (Chen et al., 2025) and two real-world robotics platforms, Ag-ileX PiPER and AIRBOT, all under stringent evaluation protocols. Specifically, the main experiments focus on Ag-ileX, where we design a benchmark suite consisting of four diverse tasks, ranging from precision-critical sanity checks to complex dynamic bimanual coordination. To ensure sta-tistical significance and fair comparison, we introduce a grid-based spatial coverage strategy that standardizes initial conditions across all trials. Through extensive real-world experiments, we first identify the most effective implemen-tation details for each action space design via targeted pre-liminary studies. We then perform controlled grid searches along several critical axes, including data scale, model ex-pressiveness, and training duration. Overall, this study con-stitutes a substantial empirical undertaking, comprising over 

2,000 collected demonstrations and more than 13,000 real-world rollouts across 500+ trained models. The main results, together with five carefully designed cross-validation exper-iments, reveal two core insights: Summary 

Temporal abstraction is decisive: delta-based ac-tion representations consistently outperform absolute 

actions across all learning paradigms when imple-mented with appropriate modern practices. 

Spatial abstraction is setting-dependent: Joint-space control excels in standard scenarios with suf-ficient data, extensive training, and strong model capacity, while task-space representations demon-strate superior performance in generalized settings like cross-embodiment and transfer learning. 2Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies  

> Figure 2. Hierarchy of the action space for robotic manipulation policies and its abstraction taxonomy

## 2. Action Abstraction Taxonomy 

We consider the problem of imitation learning for robotic manipulation, formulated as learning a policy πθ from ex-pert trajectories D = {τj }Mj=1 , τj = {(ot, a t)}Nj 

> t=1

that produces executable actions at conditioned on observations 

ot at timestep t. While this formulation is standard (Li et al., 2025b), the physical realization of an action can vary substantially depending on the control interface exposed to the policy. To reason about these differences in a princi-pled manner, we decompose the action representation space along two orthogonal axes: spatial abstraction and tem-poral abstraction , as illustrated in Figure 2. We begin by formalizing these abstractions and their impact on learning. Subsequently, we examine action chunking , a pivotal tech-nique in modern architectures, and its interplay with action space design (See Appendix G for detailed formalizations). 

2.1. Spatial Abstraction 

Spatial Abstraction defines the abstraction boundary be-tween the learned policy and the hardware controller. At the lowest level of spatial abstraction lies the actuator space (e.g., motor torques or currents), which directly governs the robot’s physical dynamics. However, direct torque-level supervision is rarely adopted for high-level manipulation policies, as it suffers from high dimensionality and poor sample efficiency (Yu et al., 2025). Accordingly, we restrict our scope to the two dominant kinematic abstractions used in practice: configuration space (joint positions) and task space (robot-based end-effector pose). While joint space and task space are kinematically equivalent via forward and inverse kinematics solvers, the choice of supervision domain induces distinct optimization landscapes. Task-space control provides a geometrically meaningful abstraction that aligns naturally with object-centric visual observations. However, it relies on inverse kinematics solvers during deployment, which introduces numerical singularities and error accumu-lation that can degrade execution robustness (Lee, 1982). In contrast, joint-space control avoids solving inverse kine-matics, but this robustness comes at the cost of increased learning complexity: the policy must implicitly learn the robot’s kinematic structure, mapping visual inputs onto a highly non-linear configuration manifold. Consequently, spatial abstraction presents a fundamental trade-off between learning alignment and execution robustness. 

2.2. Temporal Abstraction 

The second axis of analysis, orthogonal to the spatial axis, is 

temporal abstraction , which specifies the order of temporal derivatives represented by the predicted action sequence. At one end of the spectrum is absolute representation ( 0th -order), which specifies target states directly. At the other end are relative or delta representations ( 1st -order), which specify state increments. It is worth noting that we adopt a position-based low-level controller as the interface, align-ing with standard practices in the community (Black et al., 2025). Consequently, our “ 1st -order” formulation refers to the semantic meaning of the policy output rather than the physical control mode, decoupling high-level motion planning from low-level dynamic regulation. Although higher-order formulations like force control are possible, they generally rely on accurate inertial modeling and signif-icantly increase system complexity (Yu et al., 2025). Conse-quently, we focus our analysis on absolute ( 0th -order) and delta ( 1st -order) representations, which governs a fundamen-tal trade-off between learning stability and control accuracy. Under the absolute parameterization, the policy must map observations to global target states. This interface can en-courage intuitive and precise grounding; however, it also requires the model to internalize complex real-world geome-try and to cope with highly variable target distributions (Chi et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025), thereby inducing substan-tial learning difficulty. In contrast, a delta parameterization predicts relative increments, yielding a better-conditioned and closed-loop learning target. However, deploying delta actions makes the system more sensitive to feedback imper-fections: noise, latency, and tracking errors can accumulate over time and lead to drift (Zhang et al., 2025a). 3Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

2.3. Action Chunking 

Throughout this work, we adopt Action Chunking (Zhao et al., 2023) as a default component. This technique has emerged as a cornerstone for action space shaping. By predicting a sequence of future actions, policies can better capture temporal dependencies, leading to substantial per-formance gains (Zhang et al., 2025a). However, we identify that the introduction of chunking creates a non-trivial struc-tural ambiguity, resulting in two critical design challenges that remain under-explored in the robotics literature: 

1. Ambiguity in Delta Alignment. Integrating chunking with delta actions necessitates a choice of reference frame: 

step-wise delta (relative to the immediately preceding pre-dicted state within the sequence) (Liu et al., 2024; Mees et al., 2022) versus chunk-wise delta (relative to the robot’s state at the start of the chunk) (Black et al., 2025). This choice fundamentally reshapes the action distribution. 

2. Horizon-Abstraction Coupling. While the chunking horizon k is typically optimized as an isolated hyperparam-eter, we hypothesize a fundamental coupling between k and the choice of action abstraction. Specifically, delta-based control may necessitate shorter horizons to facilitate rapid correction, whereas absolute position control might benefit from longer horizons to maintain global spatial grounding. Elucidating the interplay between these factors is a prerequi-site for designing a proper action space for policy learning. 

## 3. Experimental Setup 

The goal of this study is to derive practical and generaliz-able guidelines for action space design. To ensure that these guidelines are robust across different scenarios, we conduct a large-scale empirical investigation spanning multiple hard-ware platforms, task configurations, and learning regimes. In this section, we summarize the common experimental components used throughout the paper, including model variations, hardware setups and evaluation protocol. 

3.1. Model Architectures for Policy Learning 

We aim to establish guidelines across a spectrum of paradigms, from specialized architectures like ACT (Zhao et al., 2023) and Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023), to foun-dation models like π0 (Physical Intelligence et al., 2025). Following common practice (Brohan et al., 2022), we de-sign a base architecture for policy learning. It uses a FiLM-conditioned ResNet-18 vision encoder (Perez et al., 2018) paired with a 6-layer Transformer decoder. Further details of the implementation are provided in Appendix D. To inves-tigate the interplay between action space design and model expressiveness, we adopt two prominent generative model-ing paradigms, resulting in the following two model variants, which correspond to implementation in ACT (Zhao et al., 2023) and DP (Chi et al., 2023), respectively: 1. Regression-based Policy is optimized using a standard Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss: 

LR = E(o,a)∼D 

h

|πθ (o) − a|2i

,

2. Flow Matching-based Policy provides more powerful modeling for complex distributions by learning a velocity field vθ that transforms noise ϵ into the expert action a:

LF = Eτ ∼U (0 ,1) , (o,a )∼D 

h

vθ (aτ , o, t ) − (a − ϵ) 2 i

,

where xτ = (1 − τ )ϵ + τ a, and τ ∼ U (0 , 1) . Common detailed training setups are provided in Appendix D, while specific learning regimes are discussed independently in the subsequent analysis sections. We further introduce a 

Foundation Policy ( π0), designed specifically to investigate the transfer learning properties across different action spaces. Further discussion for action space design with pretraining-finetuning paradigm is provided in Appendix B. 

3.2. Robotic Platforms and Evaluation Protocol 

Our experiments are conducted across four distinct robotic hardware configurations: (1) a single-arm AgileX platform serving as the primary setup for large-scale real-world ex-periments; (2) a dual-arm AgileX platform and (3) a single-arm AIRBOT platform, both of which are utilized to evalu-ate cross-platform generalizability; and (4) RoboTwin 2.0, a simulation benchmark designed for large-scale, repro-ducible experiments under controlled environments. The overview and detailed description of our experimental setup can be found in Figure 1(b) and Appendix E, respectively. 

Evaluation Protocol for Real-World Experiments. For the real-world experiments, we designed a curriculum con-sisting of four manipulation tasks: Touch Cube , Pick Up Cup , Pick and Place Cup , and Bimanual Cube Transfer . These tasks are characterized by in-creasing contact richness, temporal horizons, and coordina-tion requirements. Detailed task descriptions are provided in Appendix D. To ensure reproducibility and statistical sig-nificance, we implement a rigorous evaluation protocol to ensure spatial coverage. Specifically, the robot’s workspace is uniformly partitioned into a 6 × 6 grid. Both data collec-tion and testing procedures strictly adhere to this protocol by initializing object positions uniformly across these grids, thereby mitigating potential distribution shifts between train-ing and evaluation. For each real-world experiment, we re-port progress score based on three independent trials, where each trial comprises 10 individual rollouts. 

Evaluation Protocol for Simulation. We adopt the AgileX embodiment within RoboTwin 2.0 simulation environment and select a subset of 10 tasks from the 50 officially provided tasks. Aligned with our real-world evaluation protocol, we report the average success rate across three independent trials, with each trial consisting of 10 rollouts per task. 4Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies  

> Figure 3. (a) We verified that chunk-wise delta for both EEF and Joint perform better than step-wise delta representations. (b) Grid search over execution horizons across four different action space.

## 4. Results and Analyses 

In this section, we systematically evaluate different action space by addressing three progressive research questions (RQs), moving from foundational implementation nuances to generalizable trends and large-scale robustness: 

RQ1 (Foundational Impact): At the implementation level, how do specific choices in action space realiza-tion influence policy performance, and what constitutes the optimal configuration? 

RQ2 (Generalizable Trends): Building upon these optimized implementations, can we identify consistent trends across diverse tasks that dictate the selection of superior action abstractions? 

RQ3 (Systemic Robustness): Finally, do the identified trends remain robust when subjected to more advanced settings, such as scaled data regimes, foundation model transfer, and cross-embodiment learning? 

4.1. RQ1: Implementation Nuances are Decisive 

We begin by addressing the implementation ambiguities in-troduced by action chunking as identified in Sec. 2.3. These implementation nuances are often overlooked but, as we demonstrate, are decisive for policy stability. We provide more implementation nuances in Appendix F. 4.1.1. SUPERIORITY OF CHUNK - VS . S TEP -WISE DELTA 

We first conduct real-world experiments to evaluate the per-formance impact of chunk-wise and step-wise delta actions. Fig. 3(a) reports the performance of a standard regression-based policy on a single-arm AgileX platform across three foundational tasks: Touch Cube , Pick Up Cup , and 

Pick and Place Cup . Extended cross-validation re-sults and training details are available in Appendix F. Our results demonstrate that chunk-wise delta consistently and significantly outperforms step-wise delta across all tasks .Notably, the performance gap reaches upwards of 10% on average, a substantial margin that underscores the impor-tance of alignment frame selection. To explain the underlying mechanism, we analyze the action decoding process under a fundamental stability criterion: arobust action representation should not amplify prediction errors during deployment. 

Proposition 4.1 (Noise Amplification in Step-wise Integra-tion) . Let ϵ ∈ Rk be the prediction noise for a chunk of length k, with bounded norm ∥ϵ∥2 ≤ δ. The cumulative error in the decoded executable actions, denoted as ea, re-lates to ϵ via a linear transformation matrix M:(1) For step-wise delta , Mstep = Lk, where Lk is the 

k × k lower-triangular matrix of ones. The worst-case error bound scales linearly with the horizon: ∥ea∥2 ≤∥Lk∥2∥ϵ∥2 ≈ 2k+1  

> π

δ ∼ O (k).

(2) For chunk-wise delta and absolute action, M =

Ik, implying independent error propagation: ∥ea∥2 ≤∥Ik∥2∥ϵ∥2 = δ ∼ O (1) .

Proof and detailed analysis see Appendix G.2. As demon-strated in Proposition 4.1, step-wise integration inher-ently amplifies prediction noise as the horizon k increases, whereas chunk-wise and absolute action maintain a con-stant error bound . This theoretical result corroborates our empirical findings, confirming that chunk-wise delta yields a structurally more reliable representation. 5Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

Table 1. Quantitative comparison of progress scores and standard errors across embodiments and tasks. The results contrast Regression (ACT) and Flow Matching (DP) under four distinct control interface configurations. 

Bold and underlined values denote the best and second-best performance for ACT and DP separately.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

> Task EE (ACT) Joint (ACT) EE (DP) Joint (DP) abs delta abs delta abs delta abs delta Single Arm AgileX Cube 77.1 ±3.8 86.2 ±3.5 77.2 ±2.8 84.8 ±3.6 83.6 ±2.0 91.5 ±3.7 95.5 ±2.3 96.7 ±1.8 Pick 63.1 ±3.7 97.9 ±2.1 83.9 ±9.8 95.2 ±4.8 64.6 ±7.5 97.9 ±2.1 77.7 ±8.6 97.6 ±2.4 Pick Place 66.8 ±6.5 84.7 ±6.4 70.8 ±2.8 83.8 ±4.6 73.8 ±1.2 84.8 ±1.9 81.9 ±4.1 93.5 ±0.3 Average 69.0 ±2.0 89.6 ±2.1 77.3 ±2.8 88.0 ±2.9 74.0 ±3.1 91.4 ±1.6 85.0 ±2.3 95.9 ±1.1 Single Arm AgileX (Multi) Cube 89.7 ±5.7 96.4 ±3.6 94.4 ±3.1 88.8 ±3.5 96.4 ±3.6 93.2 ±4.1 97.9 ±2.1 100.0 ±0.0 Pick 67.6 ±9.2 89.3 ±4.0 77.7 ±6.9 95.8 ±4.2 91.1 ±2.7 100.0 ±0.0 90.8 ±6.4 100.0 ±0.0 Pick Place 52.2 ±10.0 72.3 ±6.1 73.8 ±7.3 72.8 ±2.8 75.0 ±5.4 83.5 ±2.6 86.2 ±4.3 93.3 ±3.4 Average 69.8 ±1.0 86.0 ±3.1 81.9 ±4.2 85.8 ±0.9 87.5 ±2.8 92.2 ±2.3 91.6 ±1.1 97.8 ±1.1 Bimanual AgileX Bowl 63.7 ±8.3 67.0 ±5.2 51.6 ±7.7 69.6 ±5.5 64.6 ±7.5 75.3 ±9.3 74.7 ±3.9 74.6 ±5.2 RoboTwin 2.0 Average 26.7 ±3.3 33.3 ±6.1 40.0 ±0.6 46.3 ±1.9 26.0 ±1.2 37.0 ±6.2 32.3 ±2.6 48.0 ±4.4 Overall Avg 63.4 ±2.7 78.4 ±1.4 71.2 ±2.9 79.7 ±2.5 71.9 ±4.8 82.9 ±1.6 79.6 ±2.2 88.0 ±2.3

Figure 4. Normalized Score Comparison. 

4.1.2. I NTERPLAY WITH HORIZON k

Building upon the optimized chunk-wise implementation, we investigate the chunking horizon k. Following the ex-perimental setup described in Sec. 4.1, we conducted a grid search across horizons. Crucially, following the practice in π (Black et al., 2025), all policies were trained using a consistent, longer horizon of k = 60 (2 seconds at 30 Hz) to ensure maximum supervision efficiency and temporal coher-ence. During inference, we then grid-searched the execution horizon from 15 to 60 to identify the optimal deployment window for each representation. The results in Fig. 3(b) reveal an insightful phenomenon: 

absolute control benefits from a significantly longer hori-zon, whereas delta control peaks at a shorter horizon .This observation aligns with our hypothesis in Sec. 2.3 re-garding the sensitivity of relative representations to execu-tion drift. Notably, in several tasks, we observe a saturation point even for absolute actions, where increasing the exe-cution horizon no longer yields significant gains. This phe-nomenon suggests a potential information decorrelation 

effect (See Appendix G). Managing the trade-off between the stability provided by long-horizon absolute grounding and the inherent information decay of distant predictions re-mains a compelling avenue for future research. We provide further discussion in Appendix B. Takeaway 

Implementation Nuances are Decisive :(1) Chunk-wise delta is fundamentally superior to 

step-wise delta . (2) Optimal horizons are critical and abstraction-dependent: delta requires shorter windows while absolute thrives with longer horizons. 

4.2. RQ2: Systematic Trends in Action Abstraction 

With the implementation strategies optimized in RQ1, we standardize all delta-based actions to the chunk-wise align-ment frame. In addition, to accommodate the horizon-coupling effect identified in earlier analysis, we employ shorter execution horizons ( k = 30 ) for delta actions and longer horizons ( k = 60 ) for absolute actions for optimal performance. With this foundation, we then pivot to the central inquiry: how do different action space influence per-formance across diverse embodiments, model variations, and learning regimes? 

To investigate these dimensions systematically, we con-ducted extensive experiments across three platforms: asingle-arm AgileX robot, a bimanual AgileX robot, and the RoboTwin-2.0 simulation environment. Our evaluation spans 14 distinct tasks in total: 4 real-world tasks and 10 simulation tasks, as described in Sec 3. For data collection, we utilized 250 expert demonstrations per task for real-world experiments and 50 per task for the RoboTwin-2.0. To ensure the generality of our findings, we evaluated both standard regression-based and flow-matching-based policy networks, each trained for 600 epochs. Furthermore, we in-troduced both single- and multi-task learning settings on the single-arm platform to examine how different abstractions withstand task interference and distribution shifts. Detailed experimental specifications are provided in Appendix E.1. The comprehensive experimental results are reported in Table 1. Additionally, we provide a radar plot (Fig. 4) with normalized scores to highlight the difference and facilitate an intuitive comparison across different action spaces. In the subsequent sections, we conduct a deep dive into the spatial and temporal abstraction axes, independently analyzing the superiority of various action abstractions. 6Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies       

> Figure 5. Consistency of Action Space Superiority under Scaling. We evaluate policy performance across varying (a) training epochs and (b) number of demonstrations. The top row illustrates the individual performance of the four action space, while the bottom row aggregates the performance across temporal ( abs vs. delta ) and spatial ( task vs. joint ) dimensions, providing an intuitive comparison.

4.2.1. T EMPORAL ABSTRACTION 

We first conduct an in-depth analysis along the temporal axis . Even when utilizing the optimal implementation iden-tified for both absolute and delta abstractions in RQ1, a substantial performance gap remains evident. Specifically, we observe that with standard modern practice, delta 

abstraction consistently and significantly outperforms 

absolute abstraction across all platforms, task configura-tions, and model variations. 

We attribute this superiority to two primary factors: (1) As discussed in Sec 2, learning a direct mapping from high-dimensional visual observations to global coordinates presents a significant challenge. Even for policies with strong expressiveness and proper normalization, global co-ordinates in both Task and Joint spaces exhibit lower local coherence. In contrast, the properly implemented chunk-wise delta actions allow the network to focus on the imme-diate displacement, which is a more tractable inductive bias. (2) There has been insufficient exploration of the horizon trade-off, as noted in Sec 2.3. While absolute representa-tions prefer a longer execution horizon to maintain global consistency, training policies with long horizons remains a complex challenge. While we hope these findings encourage further exploration into absolute representations to leverage their potential for precise global grounding, the deterministic conclusion from our current empirical study is that delta abstraction pro-vides a more robust and sample-efficient foundation for modern imitation learning backbones. 

4.2.2. S PATIAL ABSTRACTION 

Along the axis of spatial abstraction, we observe an overall performance superiority for actions in Joint space com-pared to Task space . However, unlike the deterministic conclusion reached in the temporal analysis, this spatial superiority contains some inconsistency across different platforms, tasks, and learning regimes. Amidst this complex and entangled data, we identify a par-ticularly insightful phenomenon: policies trained under the flow-matching generative paradigm exhibit a distinct excellence in Joint space learning . Specifically, as shown in Figure 4, the performance envelope for flow-matching-based models significantly expands when transitioned from 

task to joint space . These results are closely aligned with our discussion in Sec 2: as the action distribution in joint space 

often resides on a complex, non-linear, and multi-modal hardware configuration manifold (Bensadoun et al., 2022), powerful generative modeling is required to effectively cap-ture the underlying structure. While standard regression backbones often struggle with such complexity and multi-modality, the flow-matching paradigm excels at modeling these intricate joint-space distributions, thereby unlocking the full potential of intrinsic control stability and preserving the essential kinematic meaning of Joint space .Takeaway (1) Delta actions serve as a superior temporal abstrac-tion for modern policy backbones. (2) Joint-space control generally provides a more robust spatial rep-resentation, particularly when paired with strong generative modeling (e.g., diffusion). 

4.3. RQ3: Consistency and Scaling Analysis 

In this section, we extend our experiments to broader set-tings and larger-scale validations under varied control con-ditions. We investigate whether the conclusions derived in RQ2 hold firm when the learning regime is scaled in terms of data volume and computation budgets. Furthermore, we evaluate these abstractions within advanced learning setups, including transfer learning from pretrained robotics founda-tion models and cross-embodiment learning scenarios. 4.3.1. S CALING WITH DATA AND COMPUTE 

We extended the RQ2 experiments to a much larger scale, covering all three hardware platforms, learning regimes, and 7Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies  

> Figure 6. Comparison across different action space on advanced learning settings

model architectures. To evaluate Compute Scaling , we intro-duced three additional training milestones at 600, 900, and 1200 epochs. For Data Scaling , we varied the demonstration volume (100, 250, and 500 trajectories) for real-world ex-periments. The results of single-task learning on the AgileX platform across the four designed real-world tasks, aggre-gated in Figure 5, provide a high-fidelity map of action abstraction performance across varying resource budgets. Each data point in the figure represents the averaged out-come of 12 independent validation trials across different setups (totaling 120 real-world rollouts per point). Further exhaustive cross-validation is presented in Appendix F. Crucially, these results substantiate a definitive trend: delta actions consistently serve as the superior temporal abstrac-tion, albeit with marginal gains in certain settings, while 

joint-space actions remain the most robust spatial repre-sentation in most cases. Notably, as training epochs and data volume increase, the superiority of joint-space ac-tions becomes increasingly pronounced, particularly for regression-based policies. This mirrors our observations in RQ2: while task-space can be competitive in low-data or limited-compute regimes, joint-space benefits dispropor-tionately from stronger modeling capabilities and extensive training. This suggests that joint-space representations are 

fundamentally better suited to capturing the underlying kinematic manifold as the learning regime scales .4.3.2. A DVANCED LEARNING REGIMES 

To align with increasing learning demands and the objec-tive of pursuing a more generalizable embodied agent, this section examines two prominent learning regimes: cross-embodiment learning and transfer learning from foundation models. Specifically, we introduce a new embodiment, AIR-BOT, for cross-embodiment learning and employ π0 as the foundation model to perform transfer learning. We report the average cross-embodiment performance across the Ag-ileX and AIRBOT platforms in Figure 6(a), and the transfer learning results across three single-arm tasks on AgileX in Figure 6(b). See Appendix E.3 for experimental details. The results again confirm the superiority of delta control 

compared to absolute actions . However, regarding spa-tial representations, we observe an interesting shift: under cross-embodiment and transfer learning settings, task-space 

representations exhibit a more pronounced advantage and, in some cases, surpass joint-space control. We attribute this behavior to the relatively embodiment-invariant nature of task-space representations, which abstract away robot-specific kinematics and thereby facilitate knowledge trans-fer across different embodiments. These results highlight a complementary strength of task-space control in scenarios where generalization across robots or tasks is prioritized over execution robustness within a fixed embodiment. Takeaway (1) The superiority of delta actions remains consis-tent across diverse learning regimes. (2) joint-space actions benefit exceptionally from stronger model-ing capacity and extensive training. (3) task-space representations demonstrate a pronounced advan-tage in generalized settings, specifically within cross-embodiment and transfer learning regimes. 

## 5. Conclusion and Practical Implications 

In this work, we presented a systematic evaluation of action space design for IL-based robotic manipulation, decom-posing the problem into orthogonal spatial and temporal axes. By conducting large-scale experiments across 13,000+ real-world rollouts and extensive testing in simulation envi-ronment, we establish that action space is far from a trivial implementation detail. Instead, our results reveal that ac-tion representation is a decisive configuration that interacts non-trivially with diverse learning regimes. We summa-rize our findings into the following actionable guidelines to standardize future research and deployment: 1. The execution horizon k of action chunking should not be treated as an isolated constant but must be adapted to the temporal abstraction. 2. For standard imitation learning settings with sufficient resources where the primary objective is to maximize performance on a specific hardware platform (e.g., single-arm manipulation), the combination of joint space and 

chunk-wise delta yields the most robust results. 3. When the objective shifts towards generalized setting like cross-embodiment or transfer learning, task space 

(EE) becomes the superior spatial abstraction. Despite the unprecedented scale of this study, our derived insights represent a first step towards a unified understanding of action spaces. We highlight several exciting directions that remain to be explored in Appendix B, paving the way for future research. 8Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

## Acknowledgement 

This work is funded in part by the National Key R&D Pro-gram of China (2022ZD0160201). This work is also sup-ported by Wuxi Research Institute of Applied Technologies, Tsinghua University under Grant 20242001120, Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Xiongan AI Institute, and SunRisingAI Lab. 

## References 

Bensadoun, R., Gur, S., Blau, N., Shenkar, T., and Wolf, L. Neural inverse kinematics, 2022. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2205.10837 .Bjorck, J., Casta ˜neda, F., Cherniadev, N., Da, X., Ding, R., Fan, L., Fang, Y., Fox, D., Hu, F., Huang, S., et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. Black, K., Brown, N., Darpinian, J., Dhabalia, K., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M. R., Finn, C., Fusai, N., Galliker, M. Y., Ghosh, D., Groom, L., Hausman, K., brian ichter, Jakubczak, S., Jones, T., Ke, L., LeBlanc, D., Levine, S., Li-Bell, A., Mothukuri, M., Nair, S., Pertsch, K., Ren, A. Z., Shi, L. X., Smith, L., Springenberg, J. T., Stachowicz, K., Tanner, J., Vuong, Q., Walke, H., Walling, A., Wang, H., Yu, L., and Zhilinsky, U. π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J., Finn, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Hsu, J., et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Chen, X., Choromanski, K., Ding, T., Driess, D., Dubey, A., Finn, C., et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023a. Brohan, A., Chebotar, Y., Finn, C., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Ho, D., Ibarz, J., Irpan, A., Jang, E., Julian, R., et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conference on robot learning , pp. 287– 318. PMLR, 2023b. Cheang, C., Chen, S., Cui, Z., Hu, Y., Huang, L., Kong, T., Li, H., Li, Y., Liu, Y., Ma, X., et al. Gr-3 technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15493 , 2025. Cheang, C.-L., Chen, G., Jing, Y., Kong, T., Li, H., Li, Y., Liu, Y., Wu, H., Xu, J., Yang, Y., et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158 ,2024. Chen, T., Chen, Z., Chen, B., Cai, Z., Liu, Y., Liang, Q., Li, Z., Lin, X., Ge, Y., Gu, Z., et al. Robotwin 2.0: A scal-able data generator and benchmark with strong domain randomization for robust bimanual robotic manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18088 , 2025. Chi, C., Xu, Z., Feng, S., Cousineau, E., Du, Y., Burchfiel, B., Tedrake, R., and Song, S. Diffusion policy: Visuomo-tor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , pp. 02783649241273668, 2023. Chi, C., Xu, Z., Pan, C., Cousineau, E., Burchfiel, B., Feng, S., Tedrake, R., and Song, S. Universal manipulation interface: In-the-wild robot teaching without in-the-wild robots. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2024. Doshi, R., Walke, H., Mees, O., Dasari, S., and Levine, S. Scaling cross-embodied learning: One policy for ma-nipulation, navigation, locomotion and aviation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11812 , 2024. Du, Y., Yang, S., Florence, P., Xia, F., Wahid, A., Sermanet, P., Yu, T., Abbeel, P., Tenenbaum, J. B., Kaelbling, L. P., et al. Video language planning. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Eßer, J., Margolis, G. B., Urbann, O., Kerner, S., and Agrawal, P. Action space design in reinforcement learn-ing for robot motor skills. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. Fang, H., Zhang, M., Dong, H., Li, W., Wang, Z., Zhang, Q., Tian, X., Hu, Y., and Li, H. Robix: A unified model for robot interaction, reasoning and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01106 , 2025. Jang, E., Irpan, A., Khansari, M., Kappler, D., Ebert, F., Lynch, C., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022. Kim, M. J., Pertsch, K., Karamcheti, S., Xiao, T., Balakr-ishna, A., Nair, S., Rafailov, R., Foster, E., Lam, G., San-keti, P., et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. Lee, C. G. Robot arm kinematics, dynamics, and control. 

Computer , 15(12):62–80, 1982. Lee, S., Wang, Y., Etukuru, H., Kim, H. J., Shafiullah, N. M. M., and Pinto, L. Behavior generation with latent ac-tions. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Li, C., Wen, J., Peng, Y., Peng, Y., Feng, F., and Zhu, Y. Pointvla: Injecting the 3d world into vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07511 , 2025a. 9Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

Li, J., Zheng, J., Zheng, Y., Mao, L., Hu, X., Cheng, S., Niu, H., Liu, J., Liu, Y., Liu, J., Zhang, Y., and Zhan, X. Decisionnce: Embodied multimodal representations via implicit preference learning. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Li, Z., Chapin, A., Xiang, E., Yang, R., Machado, B., Lei, N., Dellandrea, E., Huang, D., and Chen, L. Robotic manipulation via imitation learning: Taxonomy, evolu-tion, benchmark, and challenges, 2025b. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2508.17449 .Lin, F., Hu, Y., Sheng, P., Wen, C., You, J., and Gao, Y. Data scaling laws in imitation learning for robotic manipulation. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2025a. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=pISLZG7ktL .Lin, F., Nai, R., Hu, Y., You, J., Zhao, J., and Gao, Y. Onetwovla: A unified vision-language-action model with adaptive reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11917 ,2025b. Liu, B., Zhu, Y., Gao, C., Feng, Y., Liu, Q., Zhu, Y., and Stone, P. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Liu, D., Niu, H., Wang, Z., Zheng, J., Zheng, Y., Ou, Z., HU, J., Li, J., and Zhan, X. Efficient robotic policy learning via latent space backward planning. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Liu, S., Wu, L., Li, B., Tan, H., Chen, H., Wang, Z., Xu, K., Su, H., and Zhu, J. RDT-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. Mees, O., Hermann, L., Rosete-Beas, E., and Burgard, W. Calvin: A benchmark for language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(3):7327–7334, 2022. NVIDIA, :, Bjorck, J., Casta ˜neda, F., Cherniadev, N., Da, X., Ding, R., Fan, L. J., Fang, Y., Fox, D., Hu, F., Huang, S., Jang, J., Jiang, Z., Kautz, J., Kundalia, K., Lao, L., Li, Z., Lin, Z., Lin, K., Liu, G., Llontop, E., Magne, L., Mandlekar, A., Narayan, A., Nasiriany, S., Reed, S., Tan, Y. L., Wang, G., Wang, Z., Wang, J., Wang, Q., Xiang, J., Xie, Y., Xu, Y., Xu, Z., Ye, S., Yu, Z., Zhang, A., Zhang, H., Zhao, Y., Zheng, R., and Zhu, Y. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots, 2025. O’Neill, A., Rehman, A., Gupta, A., Maddukuri, A., Gupta, A., Padalkar, A., Lee, A., Pooley, A., Gupta, A., Mandlekar, A., et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864 , 2023. Perez, E., Strub, F., de Vries, H., Dumoulin, V., and Courville, A. C. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In AAAI , 2018. Physical Intelligence, Black, K., Brown, N., Darpinian, J., Dhabalia, K., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M., Finn, C., Fusai, N., et al. π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2504.16054 , 1(2):3, 2025. Shi, L. X., Equi, M. R., Ke, L., Pertsch, K., Vuong, Q., Tanner, J., Walling, A., Wang, H., Fusai, N., Li-Bell, A., et al. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with hierarchical vision-language-action models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Smith, G. D. Numerical solution of partial differential equations: finite difference methods . Oxford university press, 1985. Team, G. R., Abeyruwan, S., Ainslie, J., Alayrac, J.-B., Arenas, M. G., Armstrong, T., Balakrishna, A., Baruch, R., Bauza, M., Blokzijl, M., et al. Gemini robotics: Bringing ai into the physical world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20020 , 2025. Team, O. M., Ghosh, D., Walke, H., Pertsch, K., Black, K., Mees, O., Dasari, S., Hejna, J., Kreiman, T., Xu, C., et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. Wen, C., Lin, X., So, J., Chen, K., Dou, Q., Gao, Y., and Abbeel, P. Any-point trajectory modeling for policy learn-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00025 , 2023. Xue, Z., Deng, S., Chen, Z., Wang, Y., Yuan, Z., and Xu, H. Demogen: Synthetic demonstration generation for data-efficient visuomotor policy learning. In Synthetic Data for Computer Vision Workshop@ CVPR 2025 .Ye, S., Jang, J., Jeon, B., Joo, S., Yang, J., Peng, B., Mandlekar, A., Tan, R., Chao, Y.-W., Lin, B. Y., et al. Latent action pretraining from videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11758 , 2024. Yu, J., Liu, H., Yu, Q., Ren, J., Hao, C., Ding, H., Huang, G., Huang, G., Song, Y., Cai, P., Zhang, W., and Lu, C. ForceVLA: Enhancing VLA models with a force-aware moe for contact-rich manipulation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=2845H8Ua5D .Ze, Y., Zhang, G., Zhang, K., Hu, C., Wang, M., and Xu, H. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy 10 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

learning via simple 3d representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03954 , 2024. Zhang, T. T., Pfrommer, D., Pan, C., Matni, N., and Sim-chowitz, M. Action chunking and exploratory data collection yield exponential improvements in behavior cloning for continuous control, 2025a. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2507.09061 .Zhang, Z., Xu, H., Yang, Z., Yue, C., Lin, Z., Gao, H.-a., Wang, Z., and Zhao, H. Ta-vla: Elucidating the de-sign space of torque-aware vision-language-action mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07962 , 2025b. Zhao, T. Z., Tompson, J., Driess, D., Florence, P., Ghasemipour, S. K. S., Finn, C., and Wahid, A. Aloha unleashed: A simple recipe for robot dexterity. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning .Zhao, T. Z., Kumar, V., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Learn-ing fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 , 2023. Zheng, J., Li, J., Cheng, S., Zheng, Y., Li, J., Liu, J., Liu, Y., Liu, J., and Zhan, X. Instruction-guided visual masking. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 2024. Zheng, J., Li, J., Liu, D., Zheng, Y., Wang, Z., Ou, Z., Liu, Y., Liu, J., Zhang, Y.-Q., and Zhan, X. Universal actions for enhanced embodied foundation models. In Proceed-ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 22508–22519, 2025a. Zheng, J., Li, J., Wang, Z., Liu, D., Kang, X., Feng, Y., Zheng, Y., Zou, J., Chen, Y., Zeng, J., et al. X-vla: Soft-prompted transformer as scalable cross-embodiment vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10274 , 2025b. 11 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

## A. Ethics and Reproducibility Statement 

In this paper, we employed Large Language Models (LLMs) solely for polishing the writing. No parts of the technical content, experimental results, or conclusions were generated by LLMs. All real-world data utilized in this study were collected using our custom hardware platform following the protocols detailed in the paper. Simulation data were generated using open-source environments. To support reproducibility, all code and datasets will be open-sourced upon publication. We confirm that our datasets contain no personally identifiable information and pose no risks regarding privacy violations or social bias. 

## B. Limitations and Future Work 

In this section, we look beyond the scope of our current benchmarking to identify several prospective directions for action space design. While our study establishes a strong baseline, we believe the following areas hold significant promise for unlocking the next generation of robotic control. 

1. Beyond Rigid Taxonomies: Hybrid and Adaptive Representations. Our current analysis operates within a fixed taxonomy (e.g., strictly Absolute vs. Delta , or Joint vs. Task ). However, the optimal action space may not be static. A compelling avenue for future work is to explore hybrid or adaptive action spaces that dynamically switch representations based on the task phase. For instance, a policy might utilize task-space delta actions for the reaching phase to maximize generalization, while seamlessly transitioning to joint-space absolute actions for fine-grained manipulation or contact-rich stages. Learning to modulate these representations end-to-end could theoretically combine the stability of global grounding with the local precision of relative control. Another significant but under-explored dimension is the theoretical underpinning of Action Chunking . While Sec. 2.3 addresses the practical implementation nuances, our understanding of this mechanism remains empirical. Current strategies for selecting chunking horizons are heuristic and likely suboptimal. For instance, while our results demonstrate that extending the training horizon benefits absolute actions , training with longer horizons introduces distinct, under-explored challenges regarding convergence stability and information decorrelation. A critical gap remains in rigorously formalizing how action chunking reshapes the optimization landscape to derive principled, rather than heuristic, horizon selection strategies. 

2. Scaling to High-DoF Morphologies, Dynamic and Dexterous Tasks. While our experiments cover several standard platforms for robotic manipulation, the intrinsic connection between action space and morphological complexity war-rants deeper investigation. It remains an open question whether our findings—specifically the superiority of delta joint actions—generalize to high-degree-of-freedom systems, such as humanoids or multi-fingered hands, where the kinematic manifold exhibits significantly higher dimensionality and non-linearity. Furthermore, extending this evaluation to highly dynamic or dexterous domains, such as table tennis or deformable object manipulation (e.g., cloth folding), could uncover critical constraints on action latency and horizon coupling that are less visible in pick-and-place tasks. 

3. Unifying Action Spaces for Generalization and Transfer. In Sec. 4.3, we conduct a preliminary investigation into the interplay between action space design and cross-embodiment generalization. Our results, spanning cross-embodiment learning across distinct morphologies and transfer from the π0 foundation model, demonstrate a pronounced superiority of 

task space (EE) control. This advantage is primarily attributable to its inherent embodiment invariance. Nevertheless, this observation requires broader validation. A critical next step is to extend the analysis to a wider range of embodiment pairs and foundation models, with particular attention to how different pretraining paradigms, such as vision language alignment and pure behavioral cloning, interact with action space selection. More specifically, an important open question is whether aligning pretraining supervision directly in joint space can reduce the transfer gap and potentially challenge the current dominance of task-space representations in foundation models. 

## C. Related Work 

Learning-Based Robotic Manipulation Policies. Robotic manipulation policies have made remarkable progress in recent years, advancing from simple atomic pick-and-place tasks (Kim et al., 2024; Brohan et al., 2022; 2023a; O’Neill et al., 2023), to long-horizon sequential tasks (Du et al.; Brohan et al., 2023b; Fang et al., 2025; Shi et al.), fine-grained contact-rich manipulations (Chi et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025b), and even complex dexterous skills (Zhao et al.; Physical Intelligence et al., 2025; Bjorck et al., 2025; Team et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2023). These policies are typically formulated as end-to-end models: given images, robot proprioceptive states, and optionally language prompts or other modalities such as point clouds (Li et al., 2025a; Xue et al.; Ze et al., 2024) or force feedback (Zhang et al., 2025b; Yu et al., 12 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

2025), the model must generate actions that directly control the robot. Auxiliary supervision signals, such as future image prediction (Cheang et al., 2024; Bjorck et al., 2025; Cheang et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2024; Li et al.; Wen et al., 2023; Liu et al.), object detection (Zheng et al., 2024; Team et al., 2025), or sub-language planning (Black et al., 2025; Shi et al.; Lin et al., 2025b), are introduced to leverage web knowledge and improve generalization. However, ACTION is the only modality that can be the interface for robotics models to interact with the 3D world, and thus is the indispensable modality for robotic learning that ultimately governs execution performance, making it one of the most critical design choices in policy learning (Lee et al., 2024; Chi et al., 2023). 

Chaotic Control Interfaces for Robotic Policies. The physical representations of actions vary widely, providing numerous options for supervision. A fundamental choice is whether to represent actions in joint space that directly control motors, or in EEF space, which specifies the gripper’s position and orientation in 3D space (Doshi et al., 2024). At first glance, these two representations may seem interchangeable, since forward kinematics (FK) maps joints to EEF poses and inverse kinematics (IK) provides the reverse mapping. However, as we show in this paper, joint-based and EEF-based actions exhibit markedly different training behaviors and preferences. Furthermore, actions can be parameterized in different orders, such as 0th-order positions (Liu et al., 2025; Chi et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023), 1st-order velocities (Team et al., 2024; Doshi et al., 2024), or even higher-order derivatives, adding further variability. To date, no clear consensus has emerged on which representation is most effective, where most different works adopt different interfaces without concrete reasons (Chi et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Physical Intelligence et al., 2025; Doshi et al., 2024; Chi et al., 2024). 

## D. Model Implementation and Training Details 

In this section, we provide more details about the model implementation and training procedure. The overview of our implemented model architecture is illustrated in Fig 7. Following prior works (Liu et al.; Zhao et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023), our model comprises a FiLM-conditioned ResNet-18 backbone that injects language features into visual representations, and a Transformer-based encoder-decoder for action generation. Our architecture supports two prominent training paradigms as described in Sec 3: (1) Regression trained with L2 loss for direct action prediction, and (2) a Flow-Matching method that predicts the target vector field for generative modeling. Regarding the training setup, unless otherwise specified, we follow the hyperparameters listed in Table 2 to train all models .All training procedures are conducted using 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, resulting in an overall computational cost exceeding 16,000 GPU-hours. 

Configuration Value Optimizer AdamW Batch size 512 Learning rate 1 × 10 −4

LR Scheduler CosineAnnealingLR Weight decay 0.01 Optimizer momentum β1, β 2 = 0 .9, 0.95 

Model precision float32 Image Resize 224x224 Image Augmentation ColorJitter(0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0)   

> Table 2. Hyperparameters for model training.
> Figure 7. Overview of Model architecture.

## E. Details of Experimental Setup 

E.1. Real-World Experiments 

In this section, we provide a detailed description of the hardware configurations and task suite used to evaluate the performance of different action spaces in real-world settings. Our empirical study is conducted on three distinct hardware platforms across four tasks, as summarized in Table 3. Visualizations of the hardware setups are provided in Fig. 8. 13 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies                      

> Figure 8. Overview of hardware setup for real world experiments
> Table 3. Task Curriculum, Complexity Progression, and Success Criteria. We design four tasks with increasing difficulty to stress different failure modes of action representations and define rigorous evaluation metrics for each.
> Task Goal Progress Score Evaluation Focus Touch Cube Sanity Check : Move from a ran-dom pose to touch a fixed cube. 0.5 for aiming the correct direc-tion; 0.75 for touching the cube corner; 1.0 for touching the top sur-face. Isolates spatial precision from dy-namics; validates basic conver-gence.
> Pick Cup Grasping : Grasp and lift a target cup to a height of 10 cm. 0.5 for touching the cup; 1.0 for picking up the cup. Introduces contact dynamics and gripper timing coordination.
> Pick & Place Sequential : Grasp a cup and place it onto a target plate. 0.5 for touching the cup; 0.75 for picking up the cup but failing to put it on the plate; 1.00 for suc-cessfully placing it on the plate. Sensitive to temporal drift and er-ror accumulation over a long hori-zon.
> Bimanual Transfer Coordination :Transfer a cube from the left arm to a bowl in the right arm. 0.25 for touching either the cube or the bowl; 0.5 for pick up either; 0.75 for picking up both but failing to put the cube into the bowl; 1.0 for aiming correctly. Requires inter-arm coordination
> and precise relative positioning.

Single-Arm AgileX PiPER: The single-arm PIPER is a lightweight 6-DoF robotic manipulator, which we use as a baseline platform for single-handed manipulation tasks. The setup is equipped with a third-person camera and a wrist-mounted camera to capture global visual context and fine-grained local information, respectively. This platform evaluates the model’s ability to execute precise and dynamic actions, including Touch Cube , Pick Up Cup , and Pick and Place Cup , without the added complexity of bimanual coordination. 

Dual-Arm AgileX PiPER Platform: Built upon the AgileX robotics platform, this setup is designed to assess fine-grained control in a bimanual manipulation setting. In addition to a third-person camera, each arm is equipped with a wrist-mounted camera, enabling active perception and coordinated two-arm behaviors. This platform targets contact-rich scenarios that require accurate timing and cross-arm coordination, exemplified by the Bimanual Transfer task. 

AIRBOT: AIRBOT is a 6-DoF robotic arm characterized by its cost-effectiveness and kinematic structure that differs from the PIPER arms. We include this platform to evaluate the cross-morphology generalization capability of different action spaces on the Touch Cube task. 

E.2. Simulations 

We use RoboTwin2 as the simulation platform to evaluate the performance of different action spaces under an idealized hardware configuration. Specifically, we adopt the AgileX embodiment provided by RoboTwin 2.0 and select 10 representa-14 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

tive manipulation tasks: Adjust Bottle , Dump Bin Bigbin , Grab Roller , Lift Pot , Move Playingcard Away , Open Laptop ,

Place Burger Fries , Place Container Plate , Press Stapler , and Shake Bottle Horizontally . The task set is chosen based on preliminary experiments, excluding tasks that are either saturated or excessively difficult, in order to provide a balanced evaluation across varying levels of complexity. E.3. Transfer Learning with π0

To evaluate transfer capabilities, we fine-tune the pre-trained π0 policy using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) utilizing the official codebase. The experimental suite includes three tasks: Touch Cube , Pick Cup , and Pick & Place . Demonstrations from all tasks are merged into a unified dataset and sampled jointly during training, performing a multi-task learning paradigm. We conduct experiments across all four combinations of spatial and temporal abstractions to analyze their distinct effects. Training is performed for 30 ,000 steps with a batch size of 32 , with checkpoints saved and validated every 10 ,000 

steps. All other hyperparameters align with the settings described in Table 2. 

## F. Cross Validation 

We conduct extensive experiments to substantiate the claims made in this work. While the main text reports the most representative results, this section presents a more comprehensive set of additional experimental evidence to cross-validate our findings and provide further support for our conclusions. 

F.1. Cross-Validation of Chunk-Wise vs. Step-Wise Delta Actions 

In addition to the regression-based results reported in Sec. 4.1, we further evaluate the step-wise delta interface on the Cube ,

Cup , and Pick and Place tasks, and compare its performance against the chunk-wise delta interface using a flow-matching-based backbone. As shown in Fig. 9, both chunk-wise delta end-effector and joint-space representations consistently outperform their step-wise delta counterparts.  

> Figure 9. Cross-validation with a flow-matching backbone. Chunk-wise delta representations, in both end-effector and joint space, consistently outperform step-wise delta action interfaces.

F.2. Simulation Validation: Consistency across Data and Compute Scaling 

To verify that our observations regarding action abstractions are not artifacts of specific real-world hardware setups, we conducted large-scale consistency checks in simulation using the RoboTwin 2.0 benchmark. Simulation allows us to rigorously test the scaling laws of our method with significantly larger datasets and more extensive training horizons than are feasible in physical experiments. As illustrated in Fig. 10, we observe trends that are highly consistent with our real-world findings: • Temporal Abstraction: delta actions consistently dominate absolute actions across all data volumes and training epochs, confirming that relative motion control provides a more stable learning signal regardless of the regime. • Spatial Abstraction: Similar to the real-world results, joint-space representations exhibit superior scaling properties. While Task-space control remains competitive in low-data regimes, Joint-space performance improves significantly as data volume increases, eventually outperforming Task-space by a clear margin. 15 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies     

> (a) Performance vs. Training Epochs (b) Performance vs. Data Scale
> Figure 10. Results on RoboTwin 2.0 cross-validate the scaling laws of action abstractions. Comparison of policy performance across (a) training epochs and (b) demonstration scales for regression-based and flow-matching-based backbones. These results confirm that the proposed method scales effectively with both increased compute and data.
> Figure 11. Scaling experiments on multi-task learning

These simulation results provide strong evidence that our conclusions on action space selection are fundamental to the learning dynamics of embodied agents, rather than being specific to a particular robot morphology or physical environment. 

F.3. Cross-Validation in Multi-Task Settings 

Beyond single-task mastery, we further validate our approach in a multi-task learning (MTL) setting to ensure that our findings are robust to task interference and varying task distributions. We train a single, unified policy co-conditioned on multiple distinct manipulation tasks to assess how well different action abstractions handle the increased complexity across different data volumes and training epochs. The results, reported in Fig. 11, indicate that the established trends remain robust. 16 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

## G. Formal Definition and Discussion on Action Space Design 

We address the problem of imitation learning for robotic manipulation, formally modeled as learning a policy πθ that maps observations ot to low-level deployable joint commands ut ∈ Rdq at timestep t.The policy produces a latent sequence Zt ∈ Rc×da , which is subsequently transformed through a two-stage process: 

temporal decoding into an executable sequence ˜At ∈ Rc×da , followed by spatial projection into the robot’s execution space. An overview of this pipeline is provided in Fig. 12. Here, dq and da denote the dimensions of joint-space commands and action representations, respectively, and c ∈ N denotes the chunk length. Prior work has both theoretically and empirically demonstrated that c > 1 is critical for effective robotic learning. 

G.1. Formalization of Action Space Design Temporal Decoding Let Zt = [ zt, 1, . . . , zt,c ]⊤ ∈ Rc×da denote the sequence of latent codes. These latents are decoded into an action sequence ˜At using either a zeroth-order (absolute) or first-order (incremental) parameterization. In the zeroth-order case, each latent directly specifies the corresponding action. In the first-order case, actions are defined relative to a reference state sref 

t ∈ Rda :

˜at+k =



sref 

t + zt,k , Chunk ,

sref 

t +

kX

j=1 

zt,j , Step . (1) This decoding induces a linear temporal operator Mtime acting on the stacked latent sequence, whose structure is determined by the choice of temporal parameterization. Observation Ot      

> Latent
> Action
> Zt∈ℝ𝑐 ×𝑑 𝑎
> Joint
> Commands U𝑡
> "
> STAGE 1  (EQ.1)
> Temporal  Decoding( Mtime )
> STAGE 2  (EQ .2)
> Spatial  Decoding(  𝒯 space )
> Inverse
> Kinematics
> Φ*+ .,𝑞 ,

Control Stability Learnability    

> Policy 𝜋 𝜃
> Information Decay & Variance
> Growth over horizon .(Prop. 1/2 )
> Robust to horizon scaling, but
> higher perceptual complexity.

…    

> 12c
> Pred Global position 𝒁 𝒕
> Absolute
> Parameterization
> Joint -Space
> Projection
> Delta
> Parameterization
> Task -Space
> Projection
> Ref
> position
> 𝑺 𝒕
> 𝒓𝒆𝒇

+         

> Numerically stable( 𝒯 "#$%& =𝐈 𝐜 ⊗𝐈 𝐝 𝐚 )
> but non -linear observation mapping.
> Pred
> Action
> 𝒁 𝒕
> Geometrically Intuitive, Potential
> IK Instability
> Temporally
> Decoded
> Action 𝐀 𝑡
> "
> Model
> Inference
> Training
> Deployment

Figure 12. Problem reformulation. 

Spatial Mapping Each decoded action ˜at+k is projected into joint space via a spatial operator that optionally depends on the cur-rent joint configuration qt ∈ Rdq . We define ΦIK : Rda × Rdq →

Rdq ,which implements inverse kinematics mapping task-space targets to joint-space commands. The resulting joint command is 

ut+k =



˜at+k, joint-space ,

ΦIK (˜ at+k, qt), task-space .

(2) This formulation allows the same temporal decoder to pair nat-urally with either joint or task-space action parameterizations, with ΦIK providing the necessary projection into executable joint commands. 

Combined Linear Approximation and Structural Instability 

To understand how temporal and spatial parameterizations jointly affect execution stability, we analyze the local sensitivity of the full action transformation. Small perturbations in the latent se-quence should not produce disproportionately large deviations in the executed commands. To make this dependence explicit, we linearize the composite mapping from latent codes Zt to joint-space actions. Let Tspace denote the spatial projection and define its local Jacobian 

St = ∂ Tspace 

∂ ˜a ˜a=˜ at

∈ Rdq ×da . (3) For joint-space parameterizations St = Idq ; for task-space map-pings, St may represent a differential IK Jacobian or any differentiable projection. Stacking across the horizon yields the block-diagonal operator Sspace = Ik ⊗ St. The resulting first-order approximation of the full transformation is 

Ttotal ≈ (Ik ⊗ St) Mtime . (4) 17 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

This expression shows that temporal and spatial representations contribute multiplicatively to overall stability: the sensitivity is governed jointly by the spectral properties of the spatial factor St and the temporal operator Mtime .

G.2. Research Question on Temporal Reparameterization 

Temporal reparameterization determines how errors accumulate over the horizon, how rapidly information decays, and how difficult the resulting mapping is for a policy to learn from a single observation. To understand these trade-offs, we analyze the behavior of different temporal parameterizations below. Here, we recall the Proposition 4.1, and given the detailed proof. 

Proposition G.1 (Noise Amplification in Step-wise Integration) . The step-wise delta representation corresponds to the linear temporal operator Mstep = Lk ⊗ Ida , where Lk ∈ Rk×k is the lower-triangular cumulative-sum matrix (with ones on and below the diagonal). The spectral norm of this operator satisfies: 

∥Mstep ∥2 = σmax (Lk) ≈ 2k + 1 

π .

This norm grows linearly with c and strictly exceeds 1 for all c ≥ 2.

Consequently, step-wise integration necessarily amplifies input prediction noise as the horizon length increases, inducing structural instability. 

Proof. We seek to bound the spectral norm ∥Mstep ∥2, where Mstep = Lk is the k × k lower-triangular matrix of ones. Recall that the spectral norm is given by the largest singular value: ∥Lk∥2 = σmax (Lk).Directly computing the eigenvalues of LkLTk is complex. Instead, we analyze the inverse operator. The inverse of the cumulative sum matrix is the discrete difference operator, denoted as Dk = L−1 

> k

:

Dk =



1 0 · · · 0

−1 1 · · · 0

... . . . . . . ...

0 · · · −1 1

 .

Using the property of singular values, σmax (Lk) = 1  

> σmin (Dk)

. We compute the eigenvalues of the symmetric matrix 

A = DkDTk . The matrix A takes the form of a tridiagonal matrix (closely related to the discrete Laplacian): 

A =



1 −1 0 · · · −1 2 −1 · · · 

... . . . . . . ...

0 · · · −1 2

 .

The eigenvalues λi of this specific tridiagonal matrix are well-known in numerical analysis (Smith, 1985): 

λi = 2 − 2 cos 

 (2 i − 1) π

2k + 1 



= 4 sin 2

 (2 i − 1) π

2(2 k + 1) 



, i = 1 , . . . , k. 

The singular values of Dk are the square roots of these eigenvalues: σi(Dk) = 2 sin 

 (2 i−1) π

> 2(2 k+1)



. The minimum singular value corresponds to i = 1 :

σmin (Dk) = 2 sin 

 π

2(2 k + 1) 



.

Therefore, the spectral norm of the cumulative sum matrix is: 

∥Lk∥2 = 1

σmin (Dk) = 12 sin 

 π

> 4k+2

 .

Using the Taylor expansion sin( x) ≈ x for small x (valid as k grows): 

∥Lk∥2 ≈ 12 · π

> 4k+2

= 2k + 1 

π .

This confirms that the error amplification factor grows linearly with the chunk size k, proving the proposition. 18 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

Remark on Temporal Decorrelation for Long-Horizon Action Although the Chunk-Delta and Absolute formulation 

˜at+k = st + zt,k avoids numerical drift from cumulative integration, it remains fundamentally open-loop : each offset zt,k 

must be predicted from the single observation ot without intermediate feedback. Let the regression or generative target be the displacement ∆a∗ 

> k

= a∗ 

> t+k

− st. Any model can only approximate its conditional distribution p(∆ a∗ 

> k

| ot), whose inherent uncertainty is characterized by the conditional entropy H(∆ a∗ 

> k

| ot). As the prediction horizon increases, two mechanisms enlarge this uncertainty: 1. Variance Growth. The displacement magnitude ∥∆a∗

> k

∥ generally increases with k, expanding the support of the target distribution and increasing its entropy. 2. Information Decay. The mutual information I(a∗

> t+k

; ot) decreases with k, reflecting the diminishing predictive power of ot. Consequently, the conditional entropy H(∆ a∗ 

> k

| ot) must increase. 

Remark on Absolute Stability but Increased Learning Difficulty In contrast to Delta representations, Absolute parameterization is statistically robust to horizon scaling: the regression targets at+k remain confined to a bounded workspace, preventing variance growth. Moreover, Absolute predictions map observations directly to global task-space coordinates, avoiding the stale-reference effect inherent in relative corrections. However, this robustness comes at the cost of substantially increased learning difficulty. Because the policy must implicitly infer full-scene geometry, global localization, and workspace-scale structure from raw observations, Absolute parameterization demands a more complex perceptual model and is often harder to train effectively than Delta-based variants. 

G.3. Research Question on Spatial Reparameterization 

Beyond temporal structure, the choice of spatial action manifold also imposes strong inductive biases on both the learnability and stability of the control policy. Whereas temporal parameterization governs how predictions evolve over the horizon, spatial parameterization determines the geometry of the control interface itself and thus fundamentally affects the numerical conditioning and perceptual complexity of the policy. Task-space control offers a geometrically meaningful abstraction but introduces the potentially ill-conditioned pseudo-inverse Jacobian J†(qt) into Ttotal . In contrast, Joint-space control is numerically stable by construction, yet forces the policy to regress visual observations into a highly non-linear configuration space, significantly increasing perceptual complexity. 

G.4. Summary 

Together, these analyses reveal that action parameterization fundamentally governs a core trade-off between learnability 

(the functional complexity of the mapping f : ot → Zt) and stability (the numerical conditioning of the final control transformation Ttotal ). We structure our empirical study around two orthogonal axes: temporal structure and spatial manifold, aiming to identify action parameterizations that most effectively facilitate robust visuomotor policy learning. 

## H. Detailed Statistics 

In this section, we provide all detailed statistics of our reported results. 19 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies  

> Table 4. Task success rates under different data regimes

Method Control # Data Cube Pick Cup Pick and Place Bimanual Transfer Average DP abs-ee 100 58.70 60.87 69.57 56.52 61.41 rel-ee 80.43 84.78 69.57 45.65 70.11 abs-joint 78.26 60.87 60.87 57.61 64.40 rel-joint 86.96 89.13 73.91 58.70 77.17 abs-ee 250 83.70 65.22 73.91 65.22 72.01 rel-ee 91.30 97.83 84.78 76.09 87.50 abs-joint 95.65 78.26 81.52 75.00 82.61 rel-joint 96.74 97.83 93.48 75.00 90.76 abs-ee 500 93.48 73.91 76.09 78.26 80.43 rel-ee 86.96 100.00 97.83 71.74 89.13 abs-joint 100.00 65.22 85.87 85.65 84.18 rel-joint 100.00 97.83 91.30 84.78 93.48 ACT abs-ee 100 76.09 54.35 57.61 59.78 61.96 rel-ee 93.48 80.56 70.65 57.61 75.57 abs-joint 70.65 75.00 55.43 43.48 61.14 rel-joint 91.30 77.78 67.39 42.39 69.72 abs-ee 250 77.17 63.04 66.30 63.04 67.39 rel-ee 85.87 97.83 84.78 71.70 85.04 abs-joint 77.17 84.78 70.65 52.17 71.20 rel-joint 84.78 95.65 83.70 69.57 83.42 abs-ee 500 96.74 76.09 56.52 68.48 74.46 rel-ee 97.83 100.00 96.74 65.22 89.95 abs-joint 98.91 95.65 77.17 72.83 86.14 rel-joint 100.00 100.00 89.13 76.09 91.30 

20 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies  

> Table 5. Task success rates under different training epochs

Method Control # Epochs Cube Pick Cup Pick and Place Bimanual Transfer Average ACT abs-ee 300 66.30 52.38 66.30 61.96 61.74 rel-ee 73.91 92.86 91.30 67.39 81.37 abs-joint 65.22 64.29 67.39 51.09 62.00 rel-joint 82.61 95.24 92.39 64.13 83.59 abs-ee 600 77.17 63.04 66.30 63.04 67.39 rel-ee 85.87 97.83 84.78 67.39 83.97 abs-joint 77.17 84.78 70.65 52.17 71.20 rel-joint 84.78 95.65 83.70 69.57 83.42 abs-ee 900 80.43 65.22 58.70 71.74 69.02 rel-ee 85.87 92.39 82.61 66.30 81.79 abs-joint 83.70 73.91 61.96 58.70 69.57 rel-joint 82.61 95.65 89.13 68.48 83.97 abs-ee 1200 83.70 71.74 68.48 72.83 74.18 rel-ee 86.96 97.83 89.13 71.74 86.41 abs-joint 86.96 86.96 68.48 66.30 77.17 rel-joint 84.78 100.00 95.65 67.39 86.96 DP abs-ee 300 79.35 58.70 65.22 65.22 67.12 rel-ee 93.48 100.00 82.61 75.00 87.77 abs-joint 90.22 65.22 67.39 63.04 71.47 rel-joint 96.74 95.65 91.30 67.39 87.77 abs-ee 600 83.70 65.22 73.91 65.22 72.01 rel-ee 91.30 97.83 84.78 76.09 87.50 abs-joint 95.65 78.26 81.52 75.00 82.61 rel-joint 96.74 97.83 93.48 75.00 90.76 abs-ee 900 66.30 67.39 80.43 81.52 73.91 rel-ee 88.04 89.13 82.61 70.65 82.61 abs-joint 88.04 73.91 75.00 73.91 77.72 rel-joint 95.65 97.83 86.96 78.26 89.67 abs-ee 1200 80.43 69.57 78.26 79.35 76.90 rel-ee 95.65 95.65 92.39 71.74 88.86 abs-joint 93.48 76.09 76.09 73.91 79.89 rel-joint 97.83 100.00 100.00 79.35 94.29                                                                                                                                   

> Table 6. Task scores averaged across all single-task settings (data and epoch).
> Method Space Mode Cube Pick Cup Pick and Place Bimanual Transfer Average ACT EEF abs 79 .68 ±2.45 63 .44 ±2.31 62 .93 ±1.79 66 .03 ±2.14 68 .02 ±3.95
> delta 87 .18 ±1.86 95 .03 ±1.79 85 .61 ±2.28 65 .84 ±1.78 83 .41 ±6.21
> Joint abs 79 .76 ±2.63 79 .44 ±3.17 67 .47 ±1.69 56 .42 ±3.00 70 .77 ±5.57
> delta 87 .16 ±2.11 94 .84 ±1.84 85 .74 ±2.45 65 .24 ±2.78 83 .24 ±6.33
> ACT EEF abs 79 .68 ±2.45 63 .44 ±2.31 62 .93 ±1.79 66 .03 ±2.14 68 .02 ±3.95
> delta 87 .18 ±1.86 95 .03 ±1.79 85 .61 ±2.28 65 .84 ±1.78 83 .41 ±6.21
> Joint abs 79 .76 ±2.63 79 .44 ±3.17 67 .47 ±1.69 56 .42 ±3.00 70 .77 ±5.57
> delta 87 .16 ±2.11 94 .84 ±1.84 85 .74 ±2.45 65 .24 ±2.78 83 .24 ±6.33

21 Demystifying Action Space Design for Robotic Manipulation Policies 

Table 7. 10-task performance of ACT across different data settings 

Task 10 data 25 data 50 data 100 data abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos Adjust Bottle 20.00 50.00 20.00 75.00 70.00 50.00 40.00 50.00 70.00 40.00 80.00 90.00 90.00 100.00 80.00 90.00 Dump Bin Bigbin 0.00 40.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 50.00 10.00 40.00 40.00 60.00 50.00 40.00 90.00 60.00 70.00 60.00 Grab Roller 0.00 30.00 0.00 40.00 0.00 50.00 40.00 100.00 60.00 10.00 100.00 100.00 50.00 80.00 90.00 100.00 Lift Pot 10.00 20.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 30.00 50.00 10.00 30.00 0.00 40.00 30.00 40.00 30.00 70.00 30.00 Move Playingcard Away 10.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 20.00 20.00 20.00 50.00 40.00 30.00 30.00 50.00 20.00 40.00 10.00 50.00 Open Laptop 20.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 40.00 40.00 40.00 20.00 20.00 40.00 30.00 40.00 20.00 50.00 60.00 70.00 Place Burger Fries 10.00 10.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 20.00 10.00 20.00 0.00 30.00 50.00 20.00 50.00 30.00 30.00 Place Container Plate 0.00 0.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 30.00 20.00 40.00 10.00 30.00 40.00 80.00 40.00 60.00 Press Stapler 0.00 20.00 0.00 10.00 0.00 50.00 20.00 0.00 10.00 30.00 0.00 40.00 40.00 30.00 20.00 50.00 Shake Bottle Horizontally 60.00 40.00 50.00 50.00 100.00 60.00 70.00 50.00 70.00 70.00 100.00 70.00 80.00 90.00 60.00 100.00 Average 13.00 23.00 13.00 24.00 26.00 37.00 31.00 36.00 38.00 32.00 47.00 54.00 49.00 61.00 53.00 64.00 

Table 8. 10-task performance of DP across different data settings 

Task 10 data 25 data 50 data 100 data abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos Adjust Bottle 40.00 50.00 30.00 30.00 80.00 80.00 50.00 60.00 40.00 90.00 60.00 80.00 80.00 100.00 70.00 100.00 Dump Bin Bigbin 10.00 30.00 10.00 10.00 0.00 40.00 20.00 50.00 10.00 60.00 50.00 50.00 70.00 40.00 70.00 50.00 Grab Roller 0.00 30.00 60.00 20.00 20.00 100.00 40.00 70.00 10.00 70.00 80.00 90.00 60.00 80.00 80.00 100.00 Lift Pot 20.00 20.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 20.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 50.00 60.00 20.00 40.00 50.00 70.00 Move Playingcard Away 10.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 40.00 30.00 40.00 10.00 80.00 Open Laptop 20.00 20.00 70.00 20.00 30.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 20.00 60.00 60.00 70.00 30.00 20.00 60.00 80.00 Place Burger Fries 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 0.00 40.00 10.00 10.00 30.00 70.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 40.00 50.00 Place Container Plate 0.00 10.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 30.00 40.00 60.00 40.00 50.00 20.00 30.00 70.00 50.00 Press Stapler 0.00 10.00 0.00 20.00 10.00 10.00 20.00 30.00 20.00 50.00 30.00 40.00 20.00 50.00 40.00 50.00 Shake Bottle Horizontally 50.00 50.00 50.00 30.00 100.00 60.00 80.00 30.00 100.00 90.00 80.00 70.00 100.00 90.00 80.00 80.00 Average 15.00 22.00 24.00 13.00 26.00 34.00 34.00 37.00 28.00 55.00 56.00 58.00 46.00 52.00 57.00 71.00 

Table 9. Task performance of ACT across different epoch settings 

Task 25w 50w 75w 100w abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos Adjust Bottle 0.30 0.40 0.20 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.20 0.40 0.40 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.70 0.30 0.70 0.40 Dump Bin Bigbin 0.00 0.30 0.60 0.50 0.40 0.90 0.50 0.50 0.40 0.30 0.40 0.30 0.40 0.30 0.60 0.60 Grab Roller 0.20 0.20 0.80 1.00 0.50 0.50 0.30 0.90 0.00 0.50 0.60 0.90 0.60 0.70 0.60 0.90 Lift Pot 0.00 0.00 0.40 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.10 0.40 0.20 0.30 0.00 0.20 0.30 Move Playingcard Away 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.40 0.10 0.10 0.20 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.50 0.30 0.10 0.50 0.10 0.30 Open Laptop 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.10 0.10 0.50 0.40 0.40 0.10 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.50 0.20 0.30 Place Burger Fries 0.10 0.00 0.20 0.40 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.40 0.10 0.30 0.30 0.60 0.00 0.30 0.10 0.50 Place Container Plate 0.30 0.20 0.60 0.70 0.20 0.50 0.60 0.50 0.30 0.50 0.40 0.60 0.20 0.60 0.30 0.50 Press Stapler 0.20 0.10 0.40 0.10 0.10 0.20 0.20 0.40 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.40 0.20 0.10 0.40 0.30 Shake Bottle Horizontally 0.80 0.80 0.60 0.70 1.00 0.90 1.00 0.70 1.00 0.90 0.70 0.60 1.00 0.80 1.00 0.50 Average 0.20 0.22 0.41 0.44 0.30 0.43 0.40 0.50 0.30 0.35 0.39 0.45 0.37 0.41 0.42 0.46 

Table 10. Task performance of DP across different epoch settings 

Task 25w 50w 75w 100w abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos abs-ee rel-ee abs-qpos rel-qpos Adjust Bottle 0.60 0.20 0.30 0.70 0.40 0.40 0.10 0.60 0.20 0.30 0.20 0.50 0.40 0.40 0.50 0.90 Dump Bin Bigbin 0.10 0.50 0.30 0.60 0.10 0.70 0.70 0.40 0.30 0.40 0.70 0.60 0.50 0.50 0.80 0.50 Grab Roller 0.60 0.30 0.50 0.70 0.10 0.90 0.10 0.90 0.20 0.80 0.40 0.80 0.60 0.70 0.50 0.90 Lift Pot 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.30 0.10 0.40 0.60 0.00 0.30 0.10 Move Playingcard Away 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.40 0.20 0.30 0.20 0.70 0.10 0.30 0.30 0.20 0.10 0.20 0.20 0.60 Open Laptop 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.20 0.40 0.10 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.10 0.50 0.40 0.20 Place Burger Fries 0.10 0.10 0.20 0.10 0.10 0.30 0.20 0.40 0.20 0.10 0.30 0.40 0.30 0.20 0.40 0.60 Place Container Plate 0.20 0.20 0.60 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.70 0.20 0.30 0.50 0.40 0.00 0.50 0.40 0.70 Press Stapler 0.10 0.20 0.10 0.10 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.40 0.20 0.30 0.10 0.40 0.50 0.20 0.40 0.60 Shake Bottle Horizontally 0.80 0.80 0.60 0.90 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.90 1.00 0.90 1.00 1.00 0.80 1.00 1.00 Average 0.26 0.25 0.28 0.40 0.28 0.46 0.32 0.55 0.24 0.40 0.37 0.49 0.41 0.40 0.49 0.61 

22