Title: FoAM: Foresight-Augmented Multi-Task Imitation Policy for Robotic Manipulation

URL Source: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/download/38911/42873

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# FoAM: Foresight-Augmented Multi-Task Imitation Policy for Robotic Manipulation 

# Litao Liu 15 , Wentao Wang 2, Yifan Han 3, Zhuoli Xie 16 , Pengfei Yi 3, Junyan Li 3, Wenzhao Lian 4* 

> 1

Corenetic AI 

> 2

University of Southern California 

> 3

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

> 4

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

> 5

Rutgers University-New Brunswick 

> 6

University of Minnesota Twin Cities litao.liu@rutgers.edu, lianwenzhao@sjtu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Multi-task imitation learning (MTIL) has shown significant potential in robotic manipulation by enabling agents to per-form various tasks using a single policy. It simplifies the policy deployment and enhances the agent’s adaptability across different scenarios. However, key challenges remain, such as maintaining action reliability (e.g., avoiding abnor-mal action sequences that deviate from nominal task tra-jectories) and generalizing to unseen tasks with a few ex-pert demonstrations. To address these challenges, we intro-duce the Fo resight-Augmented Manipulation ( FoAM ) pol-icy, a novel MTIL policy that pioneers the use of multi-modal goal conditions as input and introduces a foresight augmen-tation in addition to the general action reconstruction. FoAM enables the agent to reason about its actions’ visual conse-quences (foresight) and to be guided by these more expres-sive representations during task execution. Extensive experi-ments on over 100 tasks in simulation and real-world settings demonstrate that FoAM significantly enhances MTIL policy performance, outperforming state-of-the-art baselines by up to 41% in success rate. We released our simulation suites that include over 80 challenging tasks across more than 10 scenar-ios designed for manipulation policy training and evaluation. 

Homepage — https://projfoam.github.io/ 

# Introduction 

One of the main goals of robot learning is to develop a gen-eral agent capable of performing various tasks based on user commands. Multi-task imitation learning (MTIL) is a key approach that enables agents to learn multiple skills from expert demonstrations and trains an efficient policy, elimi-nating the need for complex, hardcoded solutions or reward functions. However, suboptimal policies and how to obtain generalization with limited training data are key issues that need to be addressed in MTIL policy development. This re-quires the new MTIL framework to enable the agent to learn 

> *

This work was completed by Liu Litao during his internship at Corenetic.ai. He is currently a Ph.D. student at Rutgers University. Copyright © 2026, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

task-independent skills and more expressive features from demonstrations, capturing task-specific details to ensure re-liable execution of individual tasks and generalizing to un-seen tasks and scenarios (Kroemer, Niekum, and Konidaris 2020; Zhu and Hu 2018; Rivero-Moreno et al. 2023). Previous research has shown that task adaptation in MTIL can be achieved by incorporating goal conditions into multi-task policy training (Haldar, Peng, and Pinto 2024; Kim et al. 2024; Zhen et al. 2024; Brohan et al. 2022, 2023; Ding et al. 2019). However, the unreliable execution of multi-task poli-cies remains a challenge. Existing MTIL policies that align robotic actions with expert actions based on goal condi-tions often fail to reason about these distribution differences in the demonstrations of various tasks, severely impacting the agents’ performance on individual tasks. Meanwhile, most MTIL policies adopt uni-modal goal conditions (Hal-dar, Peng, and Pinto 2024; Sundaresan et al. 2024; Rivera et al. 2022; Ni et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2022; Yokoyama et al. 2024; Nasiriany et al. 2019), which results in some inherent limitations. For example, with limited demonstra-tions and without data augmentation, policies conditioned on task instructions have difficulty generalizing to unseen tasks (discuss in Section Experiment Results ). While poli-cies conditioned on goal images offer fine-grained guidance and even demonstrate striking zero-shot capabilities (Rivera et al. 2022; Pertsch et al. 2020), they encounter ambiguities during task execution. Ambiguity means that the same goal image may exist for different tasks in the same scenario. For instance, when the robot is tasked with placing an object into a multi-layer locker, the resulting goal image has ambiguity due to closedness. The manipulated object in the initial im-age disappears in the goal image, making it impossible to determine which specific layer the object is placed in just based on the goal image ( Figure 4 real-world Scenario IV). In this paper, we introduce the Fo resight-Augmented 

Manipulation ( FoAM ) policy, a novel MTIL policy de-signed to enhance the task performance of agents while ad-dressing the limitations of uni-modal goal-conditioned poli-cies. This approach is inspired by the perception ability of The Fortieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-26) 

18460 humans when performing tasks. When humans receive task instructions, they can easily foresee the state when com-pleting the task in mind, and guide task execution based on this foresight and real-time actions until the expected results are achieved (Dezfouli and Balleine 2013). Simi-larly, FoAM cleverly uses foresight to guide task execution. In addition, it addresses the limitations of uni-modal goal-conditioned MTIL policies by utilizing a multi-modal goal condition (i.e., goal image and task instruction). It also in-novatively attempts to leverage a fine-tuned vision-language model (VLM) (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023) to au-tonomously generate goal images. During training, we ap-ply an action loss to refine the policy’s behavior and nov-elly introduce a foresight loss to control the consequences of its actions. This allows the agent to reason about its action across diverse tasks, and handle the ambiguities and varia-tions in expert demonstration data, leading to more forward-looking and precise action during inference. FoAM demon-strates significant effectiveness with evaluations across more than 100 tasks in both simulation and the real world. It out-performs state-of-the-art baselines, achieving an increase in success rate by up to 41% in success rate. Our main contri-butions are summarized as follows: • We employ a multi-modal goal condition to address the limitations of unimodal goal-conditioned policies. FoAM demonstrates the capability to generalize to unseen tasks with limited expert data while ensuring effective execu-tion in ambiguous scenarios. Additionally, we incorpo-rate a Vision-Language Model (VLM) into FoAM, which enables the agent to acquire goal images autonomously. • We propose foresight augmentation, a novel method de-signed to enable agents to learn more expressive repre-sentations and enhance task performance by aligning task instructions with the consequences of their actions. • We have open-sourced a dual-arm system with rich tasks (over 80). This system replicates the UR3e robot in Mu-JoCo (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012). It serves as a valuable simulation tool for developing robotic manip-ulation policies, such as MTIL and Sim2Real reinforce-ment learning policies (Lum et al. 2024). 

# Related Work 

Goal-conditioned Learning for Robotic Manipulation. In recent years, significant progress has been made in single-task learning policies (Zhao et al. 2023; Chi et al. 2023; Buamanee et al. 2024; Mishra et al. 2023; Fu, Zhao, and Finn 2024). However, to enable a wider adaptability, intel-ligent robots must be equipped with the ability to conduct diverse tasks and complete them effectively. Among cur-rent MTIL approaches, language-conditioned policies uti-lize large-scale datasets to achieve task generalization, or apply data augmentation techniques, such as vision gener-ation models, to modify backgrounds and manipulated ob-jects, enabling generalization across more tasks and scenar-ios with limited training data (Brohan et al. 2022; Padalkar et al. 2023; Brohan et al. 2023; Bharadhwaj et al. 2024; Hal-dar, Peng, and Pinto 2024; Ha, Florence, and Song 2023; Reuss et al. 2023; Kim et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024). De-spite the promising initial success, we found that language-conditioned policies often struggle with unseen tasks with-out additional data augmentation. In parallel, some policies have introduced the goal image as a task condition (Sun-daresan et al. 2024; Haldar, Peng, and Pinto 2024; Rivera et al. 2022; Mandlekar et al. 2023; Fang et al. 2024; Black et al. 2023). Compared to language inputs, images could provide more expressive representation at the pixel level, en-abling stronger generalization capabilities, and even allow-ing agents to perform zero-shot tasks (Rivera et al. 2022). However, goal images are susceptible to scenario ambiguity, where visually identical images can be produced by different tasks, causing actions inconsistent with intention. Collecting goal images requires human involvement, such as hand-drawing sketch (Sundaresan et al. 2024), which re-duces the autonomy of the agent. Recent work has explored multi-modal goal conditions to enhance agents’ task perfor-mance (Jiang et al. 2022; Ni et al. 2024; Reed et al. 2022; Alayrac et al. 2022; Black et al. 2023). These policies ex-tract workspaces and manipulated objects from both task instructions and initial observation, then compose a multi-modal embedding based on predefined templates. In con-trast, FoAM leverages a vision-language model to gener-ate a goal image with semantic information. The gener-ated goal image and task instruction are directly processed to infer actions and predict their consequences. By doing so, our method addresses the limitations of uni-modal goal-conditioned policies that rely solely on language instruc-tions, goal images, or predefined templates. 

Agents with Vision Language Models. In recent years, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have been introduced to robotics (Huang et al. 2022, 2023; Alayrac et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Zhi et al. 2024), enabling more complex visual reasoning and multi-modal applications. Meanwhile, in the community of image editing, VLMs also demonstrate the ability to understand language instructions, edit real-world images, and produce highly realistic visual effects (Zhang et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2024). Works (Bharadhwaj, Gupta, and Tulsiani 2023; Sridhar et al. 2024) further validate that edited images can be interpreted by robotic agents, where the generated goal images are directly used as a goal con-dition. In contrast, we integrate VLMs seamlessly into our framework not only during the inference stage, but also in policy training. The generated goal images serve as the “la-bels” to compute the reconstruction loss for the policy (Sec-tion Foresight Augmentation ), coupling the action learning and action result prediction. 

# Method 

We seek to develop an MTIL policy that can reliably gener-ate actions consistent with semantics while effectively gen-eralizing to unseen tasks with a small amount of training data, enabling agents to complete various tasks more effi-ciently and accurately. In the following four sections, we will provide an overview of the FoAM, detail the fine-tuning of a cutting-edge visual-language model to generate goal im-ages for FoAM, propose the policy foresight augmentation method, and introduce the implementation details of FoAM. 18461 Figure 1: Training and inference pipelines of FoAM. The input terms remain consistent throughout both training and inference. During training, actions and their corresponding foresight are predicted, with the foresight and actions being aligned with the input goal image and expert actions, respec-tively, to update the parameters of FoAM. During inference, the trained policy is used solely to predict the action ˆat.

## Pipeline Overview 

The pipeline of FoAM is illustrated in Figure 1 . FoAM is a transformer-based (Vaswani 2017) policy that inherits the architecture of the prior work (Zhao et al. 2023) and is trained as a conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) (Kingma 2013; Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015). The process be-gins with the user providing a task instruction gl to the agent, which is then fed into FoAM as a language goal condition through a pre-trained text encoder (Gadre et al. 2023). Concurrently, the task instruction, such as Put egg-plant into the green bowl , is input into the Goal Imagina-tion Module along with the initial observation oi. The gen-erated goal image or human-collected real goal image gi

serves as image goal condition. By integrating the agent’s proprioception jt, visual observations ot, and the latent style variable z, the multi-modal goal-conditioned policy 

πθ (ˆ at:t+k|ot, j t, g i, g l, z ) is reconstructed by the coupling of foresight and action loss. During inference, action chunks are predicted and smooth actions are produced through tem-poral aggregation (Zhao et al. 2023). 

## Fine-tuned Goal Imagination Module 

The acquisition of goal images often requires human par-ticipation, such as hand-drawing sketch (Sundaresan et al. 2024) or collecting real goal images (Haldar, Peng, and Pinto 2024) before inference. In order to improve the effi-ciency of the agent’s task execution, we embed a goal imag-ination module in FoAM to generate goal images. In this work, we chose InstructPix2Pix (Ip2p) (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023) as the goal imagination module, leveraging a dataset of over 20,000 training pairs. Of these, 16,000 pairs were obtained from robot expert demonstrations provided by RT-1 (Padalkar et al. 2023; Brohan et al. 2022, 2023). The first and last frames of these demonstrations were used as the original and edited images, respectively, and the correspond-Put eggplant into    

> the bowl
> Put peach into
> the bowl
> Put tomato into
> the bowl
> Initial
> Observation
> Put bitter melon
> into the bowl

Figure 2: Inference demonstrations of the fine-tuned goal imagination module. The leftmost image illustrates the ini-tial observation, while the following four images represent the edited goal images generated according to the task in-struction. Please visit the homepage for more examples. ing task name served as the instruction. Since RT-1 demon-strations exhibited perturbations in the final frames due to robot arm movements, we implemented a data-cleaning pro-cedure to remove noise and ensure high-quality training data. Additionally, we incorporated over 4,000 data pairs from our own simulation and real-world datasets. We fine-tuned Ip2p for 500 epochs on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU, a process that required approximately 3 days. During the inference stage, with the model weights pre-loaded, generating one goal image of size 480 ×640 ×3 took about 4 seconds. Figure 2 presents some inference demon-strations captured during VLM-FoAM Joint Inference ex-periments. They highlight the model’s ability to generate re-alistic and semantically consistent visuals based on the given initial observations and task instructions. 

## Foresight Augmentation 

Humans possess exceptional perception abilities for under-standing and interacting with external events. When per-forming a task, people can easily foresee the goal state of a scenario before execution in mind and use it as a guide. In-spired by this capability, we developed a key module called Foresight Augmentation (FA) to equip agents with a similar perception mechanism. FA enables the agent to simultane-ously comprehend both its actions and the subsequent con-sequences these actions will produce. By integrating FA into the agent’s decision-making process, we hope to enhance its overall performance in tasks execution. We train FoAM as a CVAE, utilizing an encoder simi-lar to those in (Zhao et al. 2023; Bharadhwaj et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2024; Buamanee et al. 2024) to generate the la-tent variable z ∼ qϕ(z|at:t+k, j t). The decoder is defined as policy πθ (ˆ at:t+k, ˆft:t+k|ot, j t, g i, g l, z ), which predicts a 

k × n-dimensional action chunk ˆat:t+k and foresight se-quence ˆft:t+k based on real-time observation and condi-tions, where k represents the hyperparameter chunk size dur-ing training and n denotes the dimension of the agent’s ac-tion space. To enhance the agent’s ability to interpret and respond to the dynamic work scenario, we strategically in-crease the value of k, thereby expanding the agent’s fore-sight horizon. For example, since each episode in the multi-task expert demonstration dataset D often has different time steps, we define the maximum time step of all episodes as T

and set k to a value close to T . During training, while FoAM predicts the action chunk ˆat:t+k, FA generates k potential foresight ˆft:t+k and selects the frame ˆgi = ˆft:t+k[k − t]

that is temporally consistent with the goal image gi. This 18462 Algorithm 1: FoAM Training 

Require: Expert demo D, maximum episode time step T ,chunk size k (k ≈ T ), and loss weights α, β, γ 

> 1:

Each episode includes at, jt, ot, gl and gi, representing the action, agent proprioception, visual observation at time t, task prompt, and goal image, respectively.  

> 2:

Init CVAE encoder qϕ(z|at:t+k, j t) 

> 3:

Init CVAE decoder πθ (ˆ at:t+k, ˆft:t+k|ot, j t, g i, g l, z ) 

> 4:

for each batch i = 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 5:

Random sample at:t+k, jt, ot from D 

> 6:

Encode latent variable z from qϕ(z|at:t+k, j t) 

> 7:

Predict actions ˆat:t+k and foresight ˆft:t+k using de-coder πθ (ˆ at:t+k, ˆft:t+k|ot, j t, g i, g l, z ) 

> 8:

Laction = L1(ˆ at:t+k, a t:t+k) 

> 9:

Lforesight = Huber (ˆ gi, g i), where ˆgi = ˆft:t+k[k − t] 

> 10:

Lreg = DKL (qϕ(z|at:t+k, j t) ∥ N (0 , I ))  

> 11:

Update CVAE parameters θ and ϕ using ADAM opti-mizer with total loss L = αLaction +βLforesight +γLreg  

> 12:

end for 

selected frame ˆgi is then aligned with the goal image gi us-ing the foresight loss Lforesight calculated by the Huber Loss, which is coupled with the action loss Laction as the recon-struction loss Lrecon of the policy to play a role in updating the policy’s parameters ( Algorithm 1 ). This process sim-ulates the strong perception abilities humans exhibit when performing tasks. We demonstrated in experiments that the FA significantly enhances the agent’s task performance. 

## FoAM Policy Implementation 

FoAM is designed as a transformer-based policy with suf-ficient capacity to predict specific sequences by effectively integrating sequence information from the inputs. FoAM is implemented using an ACT-like architecture (Zhao et al. 2023) with the CVAE framework. The language-conditioned embedding is obtained by the pre-trained language encoder (Gadre et al. 2023) to produce a 384-dimensional feature, which is subsequently projected to 512 dimensions through an MLP. ResNet18 (He et al. 2016) with FiLM conditional layer (Perez et al. 2018) is used to encode visual observa-tions of size 480 × 640 × 3 and embed task instructions into images, ensuring robust task performance in multiple sce-narios (Bharadhwaj et al. 2024). The visual observations are finally transformed into a (300 × n) × 512 feature sequence, where n denotes the number of used viewpoints. The goal image gi is encoded by the pre-trained ResNet18, produc-ing a 300 × 512 feature, and remains fixed during training without parameter updates. The latent variable z is obtained with a 4-layer transformer encoder and projected to 512 di-mensions. Proprioceptive input jt is projected to 512 dimen-sions through an MLP. The CVAE decoder consists of a 4-layer transformer encoder and a 7-layer transformer decoder. The input feature dimensions for the transformer encoder are 

(303 + 300 × n) × 512 . The encoder fuses features from dif-ferent modalities, and the decoder predicts the action chunk 

ˆat:t+k, while generating k foresight ˆft:t+k (each 300 × 512 )Algorithm 2: FoAM Inference 

Require: trained policy πθ (ˆ at:t+k|ot, j t, g i, g l, z ), where 

z = 0 , maximum inference time step L, chunk size k,temporal aggregation range r and weight coefficient λ. 

> 1:

Init an action buffer B[L, L + k, ∗], where B[t] stores action chunk ˆat:t+k. 

> 2:

for time step t = range (L) do  

> 3:

Predict ˆat:t+k with πθ 

> 4:

Add ˆat:t+k to buffer B[t, t : t + k] 

> 5:

Extract temporal aggregation array At = B[−r :, t ] 

> 6:

Get ˆat = P 

> i

wiAt[i]/ P 

> i

wi, with wi = exp( −λ∗i) 

> 7:

end for 

through a second-dimensional full connection layer. The FoAM training process, which incorporates the FA, is outlined in Algorithm 1 . During training, we use L1 Loss and Huber Loss to compute the action loss Laction and fore-sight loss Lforesight respectively, along with a KL divergence term Lreg regularizing the CVAE encoder. These losses are weighted by α, β, and γ. In our experiments, the weight val-ues are set to 1, 2, and 10 , respectively. During inference, the FA module is discarded. The imple-mented policy is represented by πθ (ˆ at:t+k|ot, j t, g i, g l, z ).Based on the current observations and goals, the action chunk ct = ˆat:t+k is predicted. Following prior action chunk-based policies (Bharadhwaj et al. 2024; Zhao et al. 2023; Haldar, Peng, and Pinto 2024), we apply exponential temporal aggregation to produce smooth action trajectories. 

Unlike previous work , we introduce the hyperparameter temporal aggregation range r as the actual chunk size during inference, which eliminates the equality constraint on chunk size k during training and inference. This is particularly cru-cial for deploying FoAM, as it allows flexibly adjusting the aggregation range according to the user’s intentions and the characteristics of different tasks, and optimizing task per-formance. During experiments, we observed that when r is large ( > 100 ), the agent can perform tasks more efficient, and when r is relatively small ( 50 ∼ 80 ), the agent has better reactiveness and ability to resist external disturbance (Sec-tion Robustness Analysis ). The inference code is shown in 

Algorithm 2 . There are approximately 160 M parameters in the training and around 80 M in the inference. 

# Experiments 

Our experiments will answer the following questions: (a) How does multi-modal goal condition perform? (b) How does foresight augmentation perform? (c) Can FoAM generalize to unseen tasks with a few expert episodes and without data augmentation? (d) How does FoAM perform differently when guided by a real or generated goal image? (e) How well does FoAM respond to external disturbance? 

## Data Collection 

FoAM Benchmark . We developed a dual-arm system in MuJoCo (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012), a popular physics 18463 Figure 3: Snapshots of each scenario in the FoAM bench-mark. The middle snapshot provides an overview of the sim-ulated dual-arm system we developed in MuJoCo (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012). The tasks in the benchmark are di-vided into five categories for evaluation. The objects in these scenarios are sourced from (Dasari, Gupta, and Kumar 2023; Xiang et al. 2020; Mo et al. 2019; Chang et al. 2015). The FoAM benchmark offers high-degree-of-freedom simu-lation suites. Tutorials for creating custom environments are available on the homepage. simulation engine, with 6 degrees of freedom (DoF) each arm and a 1-DOF parallel-jaw gripper. This system is the first open-source simulated dual-arm system with rich tasks, manipulation scenarios, and the same physics as the real UR3e robot. It will serve as a valuable tool for developing zero-shot Sim2Real robotic reinforcement learning policies, such as DextrAH-G (Lum et al. 2024). We have designed 10 distinct multi-task suites in the system. A total of 86 sim-ulation tasks are involved, encompassing a broad range of practical skills, such as picking, moving, pushing, placing, sliding, inserting, opening, closing, and transferring. Given the community’s growing interest in goal image-based task execution, we design an interface for each suite that enables quick acquisition of real goal images before inference be-gins. Such functionality is not available in previous simula-tion benchmarks (James et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2023). 

Figure 3 provides an overview of snapshots from each multi-task scenario along with their corresponding names. Each scenario includes varying numbers of subtasks. For ex-ample, the Open Cabinet Drawer scenario consists of three subtasks, with a general task instruction “Open the cabinet bottom drawer”, where “bottom” can be replaced with “mid-dle” or “top”. The subtasks in the scenarios Transfer Color Blocks and Put Stuff to the Cabinet Bottom Drawer are dual-arm tasks, while the remaining suites involve single-arm tasks. The FoAM benchmark is a high-degree-of-freedom simulation data generator, enabling users to customize tex-tures, colors, and even trajectories. This tool facilitates the rapid generation of high-quality simulation data tailored to Insert the Test Tube into Holes Pick Test Tubes from the Rack Put Fruits into the Green Bowl Place the Bitter Melon on Locker Layers 

Figure 4: Snapshots of the real-world multi-task environ-ment are captured from a static externally mounted Orbbec Femto Bolt camera. The tasks include Pick test tubes from the rack, Put fruits into the green bowl, Insert the test tube into holes (four subtasks each), and Place the bitter melon on locker layers (two subtasks). Please see the homepage for more details. user requirements by running scripts. The FoAM benchmark will enrich the existing simulation benchmark libraries, such as RLBench (James et al. 2020) and LIBERO (Liu et al. 2023). We expect to contribute to the development of multi-task policies in complex scenarios. 

Simulation Dataset . We generated 50 episodes for each task. Before recording each demonstration, objects in the scene were randomly initialized within a specified range. The dataset was recorded at a frequency of 50 Hz, captur-ing the robot’s proprioceptive data, action sequences, and visual observations. The visual observations were captured solely through a head-mounted camera with a resolution of 

480 × 640 pixels. For the single-arm tasks, even though one of the robotic arms remained inactive, we still recorded its action and proprioceptive data. As a result, the controlled action space n of the dataset was unified to 14 , allowing us to accommodate all tasks within a single MTIL policy .

Real World Dataset . Our real-world robot system was composed of a UFACTORY xArm 7 robotic arm, a parallel-jaw gripper, a static externally mounted Orbbec Femto Bolt camera, and a wrist-mounted Intel RealSense D435 camera. To evaluate the performance of FoAM in the real world, we designed 14 tasks across four multi-task scenarios in the real world. The snapshots of four scenarios were illus-trated in Figure 4 . The dataset was collected using a custom-built, low-cost teleoperation platform inspired by Gello (Wu et al. 2024). We collected 50 episodes for each task, with the objects randomly placed on the table before data col-lection. The randomization was constrained within a rect-angular area measuring approximately 50 ×60 cm. The final dataset comprised RGB data from cameras with a resolution of 480 ×640 each, along with joint states from both the lead-18464 ing and following arms, recorded at a frequency of 30 Hz. 

## Experiment Results 

We compared FoAM against state-of-the-art open-source MTIL policies, including Multi-task Action Chunking Trans-former (MT-ACT) (Bharadhwaj et al. 2024) and BAKU with a deterministic policy head (Haldar, Peng, and Pinto 2024), both of which utilize only task instruction as the goal con-dition. We evaluated ACT with goal images (Gimg-ACT) as a baseline guided solely by the goal image. The baseline of 

ACT with both task instruction and goal image served as the multi-modal goal-conditioned policy, which could also be an ablation experiment to assess the effectiveness of the foresight augmentation (FoMA w/o FA) . All policies were trained on the same server equipped with 8 ×NVIDIA RTX 4090D GPUs (24 GB each). Their inferences were deployed on the same laptop with an NVIDIA RTX 3060 GPU. All scenarios in the FoAM benchmark were categorized into five distinct task categories and four unseen tasks. We conducted 50 test trials for each task, and the average suc-cess rates of the different policies across these categories were presented in Table 1 . Compared to all the policies eval-uated, FoAM achieved the highest success rate across all task categories. Notably, in dual-arm tasks, FoAM outper-formed the second-best policy (Gimg-ACT) by 41% in suc-cess rate, with varying degrees of improvement observed in the other task categories as well. 

Advantages of multi-modal goal condition . The multi-modal goal condition enables the agent to perform un-seen tasks with limited expert demonstrations and without data augmentation while solving the scenario ambiguity in-volved in the goal image-based uni-modal policy. To eval-uate the generalization capabilities of interested policies, we designed four unseen tasks by modifying the Scenario 

Pick Color Blocks : green blocks were changed to purple, and blue to black. The language-based uni-modal policies (MT-ACT, BAKU) could not complete these unseen tasks, while policies involving goal image (Gimg-ACT, FoAM, FoAM w/o FA) demonstrated varying levels of generaliza-tion. We attribute this to the language-based policies that rely on text embeddings to conduct conditional responses, executing tasks based on the sub-tasks level. These policies leave the agent struggling when faced with unseen task in-structions. In contrast, image-based uni-modal policies take actions based on pixel information, aligning goal informa-tion with a single episode, which would provide a more fine-grained representation on the episode level. This enables the policy to focus on precise pixel differences between visual features and goals, allowing it to tackle unseen tasks. The goal-image-based uni-modal policy suffers from sce-nario ambiguity, making it difficult to align tasks with inten-tions. For example, the scenarios in Block-based category, such as Transfer Color Blocks and Pick Color Blocks , have the same initial observation and goal images. The tasks, such as Transfer the right yellow block and Pick the right yel-low block , have the same initial observation and goal im-age, which is the visual observation after the right yellow block disappears in the filed of view. Therefore, Gimg-ACT has the worst performance in Block-based tasks compared to other policies. The multi-modal goal condition of FoAM provides reliable execution conditions for each task while retaining the generalization ability offered by goal images. 

Advantages of Foresight Augmentation . To discuss the benefits brought by FA, we designed the ablation item FoAM w/o FA. A comparative analysis of success rates across all five task categories reveals a significant perfor-mance enhancement in task execution after integrating the FA. We attribute this improvement to the policy’s ability to learn more expressive representations by aligning actions with their consequences, facilitating more accurate task ex-ecution. According to Table 1 , our experiment results indi-cate that the ability to perform unseen tasks follows the order FoAM >Gimg-ACT >FoAM w/o FA, while language-based goal-conditioned policies (MT-ACT and BAKU) fail to gen-eralize to unseen tasks. These results suggest that incorporat-ing task instructions into the multi-modal goal condition in-fluences the generalization capability conferred by the goal image. However, the integration of FA mitigates the negative impact of task instructions on generalization while enhanc-ing the acquisition of more expressive representations, ulti-mately improving the policy’s generalization performance. 

Real-world experiment . Based on the performance of the policies that were of interest in the FoAM benchmark, we strategically selected MT-ACT, Gimg-ACT, FoAM, and FoAM w/o FA for real-world deployment. In the real-world experiments, for each scenario, we randomly initialized ten different locations and sequentially executed the tasks asso-ciated with each scenario. The performance of these MTIL policies in real-world scenarios was summarized in Table 2 .Each policy experiences a notable performance decline when deployed in real-world environments. We attribute this to the inherent randomness of expert demonstrations, the distribution differences in multiple tasks, and the variability present in the dynamic real world, all of which complicate the processes of learning and inference. Furthermore, we uti-lize only two cameras, head and wrist, and the manipulated objects are randomly initialized within a large workspace, increasing the challenge for the agent to learn skills. Scenar-ios I and II demand higher accuracy from the actions, as the test tubes and racket holes are closely located, making them sensitive to robot misoperations. In Scenario III, the four fruits and the green bowl are placed randomly, resulting in complex visual observations. In contrast, Scenario IV is rel-atively simple for robot execution, involving just one large manipulated object and a well-defined goal space. However, it introduces ambiguity, making Gimg-ACT unable to reli-ably execute tasks consistent with its intention. Consistent with the simulation results, FoAM demon-strates superior performance across nearly all four real world scenarios. To evaluate policy performance on unseen tasks, we replaced the eggplant in Scenario III with a carambola. MT-ACT still struggled to achieve any success in the new tasks. The other three policies exhibited varying degrees of generalization, and FoAM achieved the highest success rate. 

## VLM-FoAM Joint Inference 

To improve the agent’s autonomy in acquiring the goal im-age, we conducted a joint inference experiment in Scenario 18465 Policy Model size Dual-Arm (12 tasks) Block-based (40 tasks) Cabinet-based (14 tasks) Locker-based (8 tasks) Others (8 tasks) Unseen Tasks (4 tasks)                                     

> BAKU 11M 31% 47% 52% 25% 17% 0MT-ACT 86M 33% 71% 50% 32% 50% 0Gimg-ACT 84M 45% 39% 52% 23% 28% 45% FoAM w/o FA 86M 36% 81% 55% 51% 49% 11% FoAM (Ours) 86M 86% 91% 75% 85% 71% 66%

Table 1: Performance of interested policies in FoAM benchmark. In the table, the first column lists the names of the policies included in the evaluation, and the second column provides the model size of each policy. The subsequent six columns report the average success rates of the respective policies across five task categories and four unseen tasks.                       

> Policy Scenario IScenario II Scenario III Scenario IV Unseen Task
> MT-ACT 6/40 10/40 10/40 10/20 0/10 Gimg-ACT 7/40 8/40 11/40 -1/10 FoAM w/o FA 7/40 13/40 13/40 12/20 1/10 FoAM (Ours) 11/40 11/40 17/40 14/20 3/10

Table 2: Performance of interested policies in real-world scenarios. Scenario I: Pick the first (second, third, fourth) test tube from the rack. II: Insert the test tube into the first (second, third, forth) hole. III: Put the eggplant (bitter melon, peach, tomato) in the green bowl. IV: Place the bitter melon on the bottom (middle) locker layer.             

> Policy Bitter Melon Eggplant Peach Tomato
> FoAM 5/10 7/10 2/10 2/10 VLM-FoAM 7/10 7/10 3/10 3/10

Table 3: Performance comparison in success rates of the FoAM and VLM-FoAM policies in Scenario III. III. Two policies were trained using data exclusively from Scenario III: FoAM, trained with the last frame of demon-stration and evaluated with real goal images, and VLM-FoAM, trained and evaluated with goal images generated by VLM. The experiment results are shown in Table 3 .Due to their shapes, Peach and Tomato are prone to rolling, which is difficult for the robot to grasp, leading to task failure. In contrast, Bitter Melon and Eggplant are more easily grasped. Although the experimental results have a small gap, we observed that VLM-FoAM exhibits more ro-bust performance during the experiments. We attribute this to the deep semantic information retained in the images gen-erated by VLM, which helps prevent the model from over-fitting when working with small datasets. Furthermore, the goal images generated by VLM maintain a consistent overall style. This style uniformity ensures that goal images gener-ated at different times share similar features, enhancing the robot’s ability to adapt to the dynamic real world, thereby improving task execution reliability. Additionally, with the introduction of VLM, the agent can autonomously and effi-ciently acquire the goal image, with a 480 ×640 pixel goal image being obtained in an average of 4 seconds. Although VLM brings benefits to robotic manipulation, we found some limitations during the experiment. When executing tasks in scenarios with complex workspaces and small manipulated objects, such as Scenarios I and II, the generated goal images exhibited instability in seman-tic alignment. For example, when given the instruction In-sert the test tube into the second hole , the generated image sometimes corresponded to an incorrect but visually similar placement, such as Inserting the test tube into the first/third hole . We attribute these discrepancies to the limited dataset and the limitations of current VLMs in processing fine-grained pixel-level details. Specifically, the test tube’s fea-tures constitute only a small portion of the overall visual input, posing a significant challenge for the model in accu-rately distinguishing such fine-grained spatial relationships. 

## Robustness Analysis 

We conducted an in-depth exploration of FoAM, focusing on two key aspects: external disturbance, and reactiveness. Relevant videos can be viewed on the homepage. 

External Disturbance. Despite the introduction of addi-tional objects to disrupt the operation process, the robot was able to complete the task without difficulties. 

Reactiveness. During the task execution, we forcibly re-moved the object from the gripper. In response, the robot exhibited the ability to attempt re-grasping the object and ultimately complete the task. 

# Conclusion and Future Work 

In this work, we introduced FoAM, a novel multi-modal goal-conditioned policy designed to enhance the perfor-mance of multi-task policies and address the limitations of uni-modal ones. Inspired by human behavior perception, FoAM improves agent performance through foresight guid-ance, mimicking expert actions, and coupling predicted ac-tions with their visual consequences. In our benchmark and various real-world scenarios, FoAM achieves improvements of up to 41% in success rate compared with previous poli-cies. Meanwhile, FoAM exhibits certain limitations in real-world Scenarios I and II, which involve high precision re-quirements. To address this, we will explore refining long-horizon tasks by generating fine-grained intermediate goal images to serve as consequence controllers. By leveraging them, we seek to reduce cumulative errors during manipula-tions and improve the agent’s execution reliability. 18466 References 

Alayrac, J.-B.; Donahue, J.; Luc, P.; Miech, A.; Barr, I.; Has-son, Y.; Lenc, K.; Mensch, A.; Millican, K.; Reynolds, M.; et al. 2022. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 35: 23716–23736. Bharadhwaj, H.; Gupta, A.; and Tulsiani, S. 2023. Visual affordance prediction for guiding robot exploration. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 3029–3036. IEEE. Bharadhwaj, H.; Vakil, J.; Sharma, M.; Gupta, A.; Tulsiani, S.; and Kumar, V. 2024. Roboagent: Generalization and ef-ficiency in robot manipulation via semantic augmentations and action chunking. In 2024 IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 4788–4795. IEEE. Black, K.; Nakamoto, M.; Atreya, P.; Walke, H.; Finn, C.; Kumar, A.; and Levine, S. 2023. Zero-shot robotic manipu-lation with pretrained image-editing diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10639 .Brohan, A.; Brown, N.; Carbajal, J.; Chebotar, Y.; Chen, X.; Choromanski, K.; Ding, T.; Driess, D.; Dubey, A.; Finn, C.; et al. 2023. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 .Brohan, A.; Brown, N.; Carbajal, J.; Chebotar, Y.; Dabis, J.; Finn, C.; Gopalakrishnan, K.; Hausman, K.; Herzog, A.; Hsu, J.; et al. 2022. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 .Brooks, T.; Holynski, A.; and Efros, A. A. 2023. Instruct-pix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition , 18392–18402. Buamanee, T.; Kobayashi, M.; Uranishi, Y.; and Takemura, H. 2024. Bi-ACT: Bilateral Control-Based Imitation Learn-ing via Action Chunking with Transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17698 .Chang, A. X.; Funkhouser, T.; Guibas, L.; Hanrahan, P.; Huang, Q.; Li, Z.; Savarese, S.; Savva, M.; Song, S.; Su, H.; et al. 2015. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012 .Chi, C.; Feng, S.; Du, Y.; Xu, Z.; Cousineau, E.; Burch-fiel, B.; and Song, S. 2023. Diffusion policy: Visuomo-tor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04137 .Dasari, S.; Gupta, A.; and Kumar, V. 2023. Learning Dex-terous Manipulation from Exemplar Object Trajectories and Pre-Grasps. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation 2023 .Dezfouli, A.; and Balleine, B. W. 2013. Actions, action se-quences and habits: evidence that goal-directed and habitual action control are hierarchically organized. PLoS computa-tional biology , 9(12): e1003364. Ding, Y.; Florensa, C.; Abbeel, P.; and Phielipp, M. 2019. Goal-conditioned imitation learning. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 32. Fang, Z.; Yang, M.; Zeng, W.; Li, B.; Yue, J.; Ding, Z.; Li, X.; and Lu, Z. 2024. Egocentric Vision Language Planning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05802 .Fu, Z.; Zhao, T. Z.; and Finn, C. 2024. Mobile aloha: Learn-ing bimanual mobile manipulation with low-cost whole-body teleoperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02117 .Gadre, S. Y.; Wortsman, M.; Ilharco, G.; Schmidt, L.; and Song, S. 2023. Cows on pasture: Baselines and benchmarks for language-driven zero-shot object navigation. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 23171–23181. Ha, H.; Florence, P.; and Song, S. 2023. Scaling up and distilling down: Language-guided robot skill acquisition. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , 3766–3777. PMLR. Haldar, S.; Peng, Z.; and Pinto, L. 2024. Baku: An efficient transformer for multi-task policy learning. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 37: 141208–141239. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2016. Deep resid-ual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , 770–778. Huang, W.; Abbeel, P.; Pathak, D.; and Mordatch, I. 2022. Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting action-able knowledge for embodied agents. In International con-ference on machine learning , 9118–9147. PMLR. Huang, W.; Wang, C.; Zhang, R.; Li, Y.; Wu, J.; and Fei-Fei, L. 2023. Voxposer: Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05973 .James, S.; Ma, Z.; Arrojo, D. R.; and Davison, A. J. 2020. Rlbench: The robot learning benchmark & learning environ-ment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 5(2): 3019– 3026. Jiang, Y.; Gupta, A.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, G.; Dou, Y.; Chen, Y.; Fei-Fei, L.; Anandkumar, A.; Zhu, Y.; and Fan, L. 2022. Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03094 , 2(3): 6. Kim, M. J.; Pertsch, K.; Karamcheti, S.; Xiao, T.; Balakr-ishna, A.; Nair, S.; Rafailov, R.; Foster, E.; Lam, G.; San-keti, P.; et al. 2024. OpenVLA: An Open-Source Vision-Language-Action Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 .Kingma, D. P. 2013. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 .Kroemer, O.; Niekum, S.; and Konidaris, G. 2020. A Review of Robot Learning for Manipulation: Challenges, Represen-tations, and Algorithms. arXiv:1907.03146. Liu, B.; Zhu, Y.; Gao, C.; Feng, Y.; Liu, Q.; Zhu, Y.; and Stone, P. 2023. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 44776–44791. Lum, T. G. W.; Matak, M.; Makoviychuk, V.; Handa, A.; Allshire, A.; Hermans, T.; Ratliff, N. D.; and Van Wyk, K. 2024. Dextrah-g: Pixels-to-action dexterous arm-hand grasping with geometric fabrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02274 .18467 Mandlekar, A.; Nasiriany, S.; Wen, B.; Akinola, I.; Narang, Y.; Fan, L.; Zhu, Y.; and Fox, D. 2023. Mimicgen: A data generation system for scalable robot learning using human demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17596 .Mishra, U. A.; Xue, S.; Chen, Y.; and Xu, D. 2023. Gener-ative skill chaining: Long-horizon skill planning with diffu-sion models. In Conference on Robot Learning , 2905–2925. PMLR. Mo, K.; Zhu, S.; Chang, A. X.; Yi, L.; Tripathi, S.; Guibas, L. J.; and Su, H. 2019. PartNet: A Large-Scale Benchmark for Fine-Grained and Hierarchical Part-Level 3D Object Un-derstanding. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Nasiriany, S.; Pong, V.; Lin, S.; and Levine, S. 2019. Plan-ning with goal-conditioned policies. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 32. Ni, F.; Hao, J.; Wu, S.; Kou, L.; Liu, J.; Zheng, Y.; Wang, B.; and Zhuang, Y. 2024. Generate Subgoal Images before Act: Unlocking the Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Diffusion Model for Robot Manipulation with Multimodal Prompts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 13991–14000. Padalkar, A.; Pooley, A.; Jain, A.; Bewley, A.; Herzog, A.; Irpan, A.; Khazatsky, A.; Rai, A.; Singh, A.; Brohan, A.; et al. 2023. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864 .Perez, E.; Strub, F.; De Vries, H.; Dumoulin, V.; and Courville, A. 2018. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32. Pertsch, K.; Rybkin, O.; Ebert, F.; Zhou, S.; Jayaraman, D.; Finn, C.; and Levine, S. 2020. Long-horizon visual planning with goal-conditioned hierarchical predictors. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33: 17321–17333. Reed, S.; Zolna, K.; Parisotto, E.; Colmenarejo, S. G.; Novikov, A.; Barth-Maron, G.; Gimenez, M.; Sulsky, Y.; Kay, J.; Springenberg, J. T.; et al. 2022. A generalist agent. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175 .Reuss, M.; Li, M.; Jia, X.; and Lioutikov, R. 2023. Goal-conditioned imitation learning using score-based diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02532 .Rivera, C. G.; Handelman, D. A.; Ratto, C. R.; Patrone, D.; and Paulhamus, B. L. 2022. Visual goal-directed meta-imitation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 3767– 3773. Rivero-Moreno, Y.; Echevarria, S.; Vidal-Valderrama, C.; Pianetti, L.; Cordova-Guilarte, J.; Navarro-Gonzalez, J.; Acevedo-Rodr´ ıguez, J.; Dorado-Avila, G.; Osorio-Romero, L.; Chavez-Campos, C.; et al. 2023. Robotic surgery: a comprehensive review of the literature and current trends. 

Cureus , 15(7). Shi, L. X.; Hu, Z.; Zhao, T. Z.; Sharma, A.; Pertsch, K.; Luo, J.; Levine, S.; and Finn, C. 2024. Yell at your robot: Im-proving on-the-fly from language corrections. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12910 .Sohn, K.; Lee, H.; and Yan, X. 2015. Learning struc-tured output representation using deep conditional genera-tive models. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 28. Sridhar, A.; Shah, D.; Glossop, C.; and Levine, S. 2024. Nomad: Goal masked diffusion policies for navigation and exploration. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 63–70. IEEE. Sundaresan, P.; Vuong, Q.; Gu, J.; Xu, P.; Xiao, T.; Kirmani, S.; Yu, T.; Stark, M.; Jain, A.; Hausman, K.; Sadigh, D.; Bohg, J.; and Schaal, S. 2024. RT-Sketch: Goal-Conditioned Imitation Learning from Hand-Drawn Sketches. arXiv:2403.02709. Todorov, E.; Erez, T.; and Tassa, Y. 2012. MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems ,5026–5033. IEEE. Vaswani, A. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Wang, C.; Fang, H.; Fang, H.-S.; and Lu, C. 2024. RISE: 3D Perception Makes Real-World Robot Imitation Simple and Effective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12281 .Wu, P.; Shentu, Y.; Yi, Z.; Lin, X.; and Abbeel, P. 2024. GELLO: A General, Low-Cost, and Intuitive Teleoperation Framework for Robot Manipulators. arXiv:2309.13037. Xiang, F.; Qin, Y.; Mo, K.; Xia, Y.; Zhu, H.; Liu, F.; Liu, M.; Jiang, H.; Yuan, Y.; Wang, H.; Yi, L.; Chang, A. X.; Guibas, L. J.; and Su, H. 2020. SAPIEN: A SimulAted Part-based Interactive ENvironment. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Yang, Z.; Li, L.; Lin, K.; Wang, J.; Lin, C.-C.; Liu, Z.; and Wang, L. 2023. The dawn of lmms: Preliminary explorations with gpt-4v (ision). arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17421 , 9(1): 1. Yokoyama, N.; Ha, S.; Batra, D.; Wang, J.; and Bucher, B. 2024. Vlfm: Vision-language frontier maps for zero-shot se-mantic navigation. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 42–48. IEEE. Zhang, K.; Mo, L.; Chen, W.; Sun, H.; and Su, Y. 2024. Magicbrush: A manually annotated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36. Zhao, T. Z.; Kumar, V.; Levine, S.; and Finn, C. 2023. Learn-ing fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hard-ware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 .Zhen, H.; Qiu, X.; Chen, P.; Yang, J.; Yan, X.; Du, Y.; Hong, Y.; and Gan, C. 2024. 3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-action generative world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09631 .Zhi, P.; Zhang, Z.; Han, M.; Zhang, Z.; Li, Z.; Jiao, Z.; Jia, B.; and Huang, S. 2024. Closed-loop open-vocabulary mobile manipulation with gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10220 .Zhu, Z.; and Hu, H. 2018. Robot learning from demonstra-tion in robotic assembly: A survey. Robotics , 7(2): 17. 18468