Title: Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09005v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 01:15:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

Ming Sun 1,2 , Rui Wang 1,2 †, Xingrui Yu 3,4 , Lihua Jing 1,2 , Hangyu Du 6, Zhenglin Wan 7, Xu Pan 8,Ivor Tsang 3,4,5 1Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 

> 2

School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 

> 3

A*STAR Institute of High Performance Computing (A*STAR IHPC), Singapore 

> 4

A*STAR Centre for Frontier AI Research (A*STAR CFAR), Singapore 

> 5

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

> 6

College of Design and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

> 7

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 

> 8

State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing (LIESMARS), Wuhan University, China Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) support generalist robotic control by enabling end-to-end decision policies directly from multi-modal inputs. As trained VLAs are increasingly shared and adapted, protecting model ownership becomes essential for secure deployment and responsible open-source usage. In this paper, we present GuardVLA, the first backdoor-based ownership verification framework specifically designed for VLAs. GuardVLA embeds a stealthy and harmless backdoor watermark into the protected model during training by injecting secret messages into embodied visual data. For post-release verification, we propose a swap-and-detect mechanism, in which the trigger projector and an external classifier head are used to activate and detect the embedded backdoor based on prediction probabilities. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets, model architectures, and adaptation settings demonstrate that GuardVLA enables reliable ownership verification while preserving benign task performance. Further results show that the embedded watermark remains detectable under post-release model adaptation. 

Date : May 8, 2026 

Correspondence : Ming Sun (sunming@iie.ac.cn) Rui Wang (wangrui@iie.ac.cn) 

## 1. Introduction 

Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) map language instructions and visual observations to continuous robotic actions, enabling generalist embodied policies for long-horizon task execution, cross-task generaliza-tion, and adaptation to novel scenes (Ma et al., 2024). As VLAs are increasingly investigated for real-world applications such as household assistance (Firoozi et al., 2025), healthcare (Laursen et al., 2022), and autonomous navigation (Pei et al., 2024), their practical value has become increasingly evident. Meanwhile,  

> †Corresponding author: Rui Wang
> arXiv:2605.09005v1 [cs.RO] 9 May 2026

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models easily copied without permission               

> Protected Model Safe Fine -tuning
> Traceable
> Pretrained Model
> Unsafe Model
> Unsafe Model Release
> classifier
> head
> Trigger
> Projector
> Internal Module Swapping
> Unsafe Fine -tuning
> copyright watermark preserved
> Vulnerable
> Watermark
> Detected !
> Watermark
> Undetected.
> (b) Verification (a) Comparison of Safe vs. Unsafe Fine -tuning
> Safe Model Release

Figure 1: Motivation of GuardVLA: (a) Safe fine-tuning preserves verifiable intellectual property evidence after model release, while unsafe fine-tuning leads to untraceable model usage. (b) Ownership is verified via the swap-and-detect mechanism. 

developing capable VLAs (Zitkovich et al., 2023, Mees et al., 2024) demands substantial investments in model architectures (Touvron et al., 2023, Team et al., 2024), fine-tuning strategies (Kim et al., 2025a, Lipman et al., 2023), and large-scale embodied datasets (O’Neill et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2023). These invest-ments make trained VLAs valuable intellectual assets, but open release also exposes them to unauthorized reuse, modification, and commercial deployment. Therefore, reliable ownership verification is essential for protecting VLA developers and supporting responsible model sharing. However, existing model protection methods Cao et al. (2021), Peng et al. (2022) are difficult to directly apply to VLAs. Unlike standard vision-language models that mainly produce semantic outputs, VLAs generate executable continuous actions coupled with task dynamics and robot safety. In addition, different VLA policies may still exhibit highly similar successful behaviors on the same task, leading to weak response-level separability and unreliable attribution. Therefore, VLA ownership verification should provide distinguishable ownership evidence while preserving normal task performance, avoiding unsafe behaviors during deployment, and remaining robust after downstream fine-tuning. For VLAs, ownership verification thus hinges on (1) harmless and persistent watermark embedding together with (2) reliable verification mechanisms that do not interfere with normal robotic execution .Based on these considerations, we propose GuardVLA, a novel ownership verification framework tailored for VLAs. GuardVLA adopts a backdoor-based verification strategy that actively embeds owner-specific evidence into the protected model during training. Different from protection methods that may rely on normal behavior discrepancies or induce abnormal outputs, GuardVLA keeps the watermark inactive during standard deployment and activates it only during verification. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), unsafe fine-tuning fails to preserve intellectual property evidence after model release. In contrast, our safe fine-tuning embeds a secret message into embodied visual data via steganography, thereby implanting a stealthy and harmless backdoor watermark into the protected model while preserving downstream task performance. To reveal the embedded watermark without altering normal robotic behavior, we explicitly decouple benign execution 

> 2

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models from trigger-mode verification. Concretely, we introduce a swap-and-detect mechanism. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the model uses its original components during benign execution, while during verification the original projector and action head are replaced with a specially trained trigger projector and an external classifier head. The resulting prediction probability is used as ownership evidence. Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We introduce GuardVLA, the first backdoor-based ownership verification framework for vision-language-action models, which embeds a stealthy and harmless backdoor watermark during training without affecting normal task performance. (2) We introduce a swap-and-detect verification mechanism that explicitly decouples benign execution from trigger-mode verification, enabling reliable ownership detection without inducing unsafe behaviors during normal deployment. (3) Extensive experiments across multiple datasets, models, and fine-tuning settings demonstrate robust performance while preserving downstream performance. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Vision-Language-Action Models 

Recent studies have explored adapting vision-language models (VLMs) Touvron et al. (2023), Team et al. (2024) to directly predict low-level robotic actions, leading to a series of vision-language-action models (VLAs) Zitkovich et al. (2023), Mees et al. (2024). OpenVLA Kim et al. (2025b) integrates dual visual encoders with a 7B LLaMA-2 backbone for language-conditioned robotic control, while 𝜋 0 Black et al. (2024) introduces a flow-matching policy architecture for scalable cross-embodiment control. Recent efforts further improve VLA efficiency, safety, multi-modal perception, and real-world deployment. More recent VLA research has focused on lightweight architectures Shukor et al. (2025), Wen et al. (2025), Wang et al. (2025c), safety-aware action generation Zhang et al. (2025), expanded multi-modal inputs Zheng et al. (2025), Qu et al. (2025), Hao et al. (2025), and practical deployment in diverse real-world scenarios Wang et al. (2025a), Zhong et al. (2025). However, many enterprise-level VLAs Team et al. (2025), Shi et al. (2025) remain closed-source due to the absence of deployable protection mechanisms, highlighting the need for systematic research on ownership verification for VLA models. 

2.2. Model Ownership Verification 

Model ownership verification aims to determine whether a queried model is derived from a protected model. Existing proactive verification methods Cao et al. (2021), Peng et al. (2022) identify ownership by comparing model-specific responses to carefully designed inputs. These methods are effective when model outputs, such as labels, logits, or semantic responses, are sufficiently separable. However, they are less reliable for VLAs, since different policies may exhibit highly similar successful behaviors on the same task, leading to weak response-level separability and unreliable attribution. We provide a more detailed comparison with conventional protection methods in Appendix G. Watermarking methods Adi et al. (2018), Cong et al. (2022) provide another protection paradigm by embedding owner-specific evidence into the model or its outputs during training. Backdoor-based water-marking Zhai et al. (2023), Peng et al. (2025) further learns a trigger-response association and uses the triggered response as ownership evidence, making it more suitable for VLA protection, because the evidence is explicitly embedded and can persist after downstream fine-tuning. However, directly applying backdoor mechanisms to VLAs is unsafe, as triggered responses may alter executable robot actions. Existing VLA backdoor studies, such as BadVLA Zhou et al. (2025), mainly induce incorrect and untargeted actions and are therefore unsuitable for harmless and effective ownership verification. In contrast, GuardVLA embeds 

> 3

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models a harmless backdoor watermark and decouples benign execution from trigger-mode verification, enabling reliable ownership detection without affecting normal robotic behavior. 

## 3. Preliminary 

3.1. Vision-Language-Action Model 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models aim to learn an end-to-end control policy that maps multi-modal observations and language instructions to low-level robotic actions. Formally, a VLA model is parameterized as 𝑓 𝜃 : 𝒳 × ℐ → 𝒜 , where 𝒳 denotes the observation space, ℐ denotes the instruction space, and 𝒜 denotes the action space. The action space 𝒜 ⊂ R𝑑 consists of continuous robotic control commands. In this work, we focus on a 7-degree-of-freedom manipulator, where each action is specified as 

𝑎 = [ ∆𝑃 𝑥 , ∆𝑃 𝑦 , ∆𝑃 𝑧 , ∆𝑅 𝑥 , ∆𝑅 𝑦 , ∆𝑅 𝑧 , 𝐺 ], (1) where ∆𝑃 and ∆𝑅 denote relative translational and rotational displacements, respectively, and 𝐺 ∈ R

represents the gripper control signal. 

3.2. Problem Setting Post-Release Auditing for VLAs. We consider a post-release setting where a protected VLA may be reused, fine-tuned, or integrated into downstream systems without authorization. The defender aims to determine whether a queried model originates from the protected VLA without observing the downstream adaptation process. This is challenging because VLA outputs are executable action sequences coupled with task dynamics, and different policies may produce similar behaviors. 

Threat Model. We consider two parties: model infringers and model protection platforms. Infringers may obtain the released model and apply arbitrary fine-tuning or adaptation. During verification, the queried provider exposes only the required module interfaces, without revealing private data or training details. The protection platform embeds the watermark before release and audits whether the queried model contains owner-specific evidence. 

Auditing Interface. Since interface-based deployment has been shown feasible for VLA systems Community (2026), GuardVLA does not necessarily require full open-weight access to the entire accused model. Instead, verification can be conducted through limited access to the necessary callable module interfaces. The trigger projector and classifier head are verifier-side modules used only during auditing. This avoids exposing private data, training details, modification history, or full model parameters. 

3.3. Defense Goals 

GuardVLA aims to satisfy the following objective: 

(1) Verifiability under Adaptation: The watermark should support reliable ownership verification even after post-release model adaptation, without requiring access to the attacker’s training process. 

(2) Model Fidelity: The watermark should preserve normal VLA control behavior and maintain downstream task performance during standard deployment. 

> 4

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

(3) Stealthiness and Harmlessness: The watermarked model should behave similarly to a clean model in benign execution, while ownership evidence should be activated only during verification. 

## 4. Method 

As shown in Figure 3, during the watermarking phase, GuardVLA embeds the watermark into the protected model via safe fine-tuning (Section 4.2). Then, it trains a trigger projector and classifier head using the surrogate clean, noise, and protected models to activate and detect the watermark (Section 4.3). During the verification phase, the swap-and-detect mechanism switches the model into the trigger mode and outputs a detection probability for ownership verification (Section 4.4). 

4.1. Operation Modes 

We first clarify the two operation modes involved in our framework. Figure 2 illustrates the two operating modes used in the swap-and-detect protocol. 

Benign Mode. When the model is deployed to perform downstream tasks under normal conditions, it operates in the benign mode. Internally, the visual observation 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 is first processed by a vision backbone 𝑉 (·)

to obtain a latent representation ℎ = 𝑉 (𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ), which is then aligned by a benign projector 𝑃 𝑏 (·) to produce visual tokens 𝑣 = 𝑃 𝑏 (ℎ). The visual tokens 𝑣 are combined with the instruction-derived language tokens 𝑖 

and fed into a large language model (LLM), yielding a multi-modal latent 𝑧 = 𝐿 (𝑖 , 𝑣 ). Finally, 𝑧 is mapped to a list of action tokens 𝑎 by an action expert 𝐻 𝑎 (·), which is used to parameterize low-level robotic control. 

Trigger Mode. During ownership verification, the model operates in the trigger mode, where the benign projector 𝑃 𝑏 (·) and action expert 𝐻 𝑎 (·) are replaced by the trigger projector 𝑃 𝑡 (·) and a classifier head 𝐻 𝑐 (·).Given the observation 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 , the vision backbone 𝑉 (·) produces the latent representation ℎ, and then ℎ is projected by 𝑃 𝑡 (·) into trigger-aware visual tokens 𝑣 . The tokens 𝑣 are jointly processed with the instruction 𝑖 

by LLM 𝐿 (·), and the resulting representation is fed into 𝐻 𝑐 (·) to output prediction probabilities for ownership verification. Large Language Model                      

> Vision Backbone
> benign projector 𝑷 𝒃
> 𝑥 "#
> action expert 𝐻 $
> >>
> >>
> RGB 𝑖 Instruction
> 𝑎 Action (a) benign mode (b) trigger mode
> performance test
> Large Language Model
> Vision Backbone
> trigger projector 𝑷 𝒕
> 𝑥 "#
> classi<ier head 𝐻 &
> >>
> >>
> RGB 𝑖 Instruction
> watermark detection
> 𝑟 Prediction

Figure 2: Operating modes of GuardVLA: The benign mode supports normal action generation for performance testing, while the trigger mode swaps internal modules to activate and detect the embedded watermark for ownership verification. 

4.2. Watermark Embedding via Safe Fine-tuning 

Inspired by prior watermarking work Cui et al. (2023), Feng et al. (2024), we use a fixed secret message to produce consistent watermark patterns across training samples, which facilitates reliable learning of the 

> 5

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models ℒ!"#$% 

random image 𝒙 𝒓 

𝐸 !

❄

101010 ⋯

Secret Embedder 

message 𝒎 𝒔 

residual 𝜹 𝒔 

𝐸 !

❄

𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋 ⋯

random message 𝒎 𝒓 

observa4on 𝒙 𝒐𝒃 

Secret Embedder residual 𝜹 𝒓 

watermarked image 𝒙 𝒔 

𝑴 𝒄 

Clean Model 

𝑴 𝒘 

𝑴 𝒓 

Random Model 

Watermark Model 

> 🔥
> 🔥
> 🔥

Watermarking Phase I: Watermark Embedding via Safe Fine -tuning 

Large Language Model 

Vision Backbone 

trigger projector 𝑷 𝒕 

> >>
> >>

❄

❄

> 🔥

𝐻 - 

> 🔥

Large Language Model 

Vision Backbone 

trigger projector 𝑷 𝒕 

> >>
> >>

❄

❄

> 🔥

𝐻 - 

> 🔥

Large Language Model 

Vision Backbone 

trigger projector 𝑷 𝒕 

> >>
> >>

❄

❄

> 🔥

𝐻 -

> 🔥

vector 𝓿 𝒘 vector 𝓿 𝒓 ··· ··· vector 𝓿 𝒄 ··· 

ℒ!"$ 

ℒ-. 

anchor pull push 

observa4on 𝒙 𝒐𝒃 

Watermarking Phase II: Trigger Projector and Classifier Co -training 

Frozen 

Loss Propagation 

Forward Flow ❄ 

> 🔥

Trained 

𝑴 𝒘 𝑴 𝒓 𝑴 𝒄 

ℒ-. ℒ-. 

𝑴 

𝑴 

> suspicious model
> [trigger mode]

𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 

𝑐𝑟𝑎𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑑 

performance 

test 

watermark 

detection 

𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 

𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 

Verification Phase 

> suspicious model
> [benign mode]

ℒ!"#$% 

ℒ!"#$%         

> 𝑺𝑹 ≥𝝉 𝒔𝒓
> 𝑺𝑹 <𝝉 𝒔𝒓
> 𝑾𝑰𝑪 <𝝉 𝒘𝒊𝒄
> 𝑾𝑰𝑪 ≥𝝉 𝒘𝒊𝒄

Figure 3: Main Pipeline of GuardVLA : During training, GuardVLA embeds a backdoor watermark into the protected model via safe fine-tuning. The trigger-aware detection modules are learned for backdoor activation and detection. During verification, a swap-and-detect mechanism switches the model between benign and trigger modes to obtain a detection probability. 

watermark signal by the protected VLA. Accordingly, we adopt a pretrained image steganography Baluja (2017), Tancik et al. (2020) embedder 𝐸 𝜙 (·). Given a binary secret message 𝑚 𝑠 and an input observation 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ,the embedder outputs a sample-specific watermark residual 𝛿 𝑠 = 𝐸 𝜙 (𝑚 𝑠 , 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ). For the input observation 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ,we then construct the watermarked observation as 𝑥 𝑠 = 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 + 𝛿 𝑠 , thereby enforcing consistent watermark patterns across the training data. Given the fine-tuning strategy specified by the model owner, the platform fine-tunes the protected model directly on the watermarked observations, thereby embedding the backdoor watermark into the model. Concretely, the watermarked model 𝑀 𝑤 (·; 𝜃 𝑤 ) is optimized on watermarked inputs: 

min 

> 𝜃 𝑤

E(𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ,𝑖 ,𝑎 )∼𝒟 [︁ ℒtrain (︁ 𝑀 𝑤 (𝑥 𝑠 , 𝑖 ; 𝜃 𝑤 ), 𝑎 )︁]︁ , (2) where 𝒟 denotes the original embodied training dataset, and ℒtrain (·) is the task-specific training loss. To support the training of the trigger projector and classifier head, we additionally train two auxiliary models using the same fine-tuning strategy as the protected model. First, a surrogate clean model 𝑀 𝑐 (·; 𝜃 𝑐 ) is 

> 6

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models obtained by fine-tuning on the original embodied dataset without any watermark modification: 

min 

> 𝜃 𝑐

E(𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ,𝑖 ,𝑎 )∼𝒟 [︁ ℒtrain (︁ 𝑀 𝑐 (𝑥 𝑜𝑏 , 𝑖 ; 𝜃 𝑐 ), 𝑎 )︁]︁ . (3) To ensure that the learned watermark corresponds uniquely to the target secret pattern, we further construct a noise model 𝑀 𝑟 (·; 𝜃 𝑟 ). Specifically, for each observation 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 , we randomly sample a binary secret message 𝑚 𝑟 

from the message space M excluding the target secret 𝑚 𝑠 (i.e. , 𝑚 𝑟 ∼ M ∖ { 𝑚 𝑠 }). A random steganographic observation is then generated as 𝑥 𝑟 = 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 + 𝐸 𝜙 (𝑚 𝑟 , 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ). The noise model is trained as: 

min 

> 𝜃 𝑟

E(𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ,𝑖 ,𝑎 )∼𝒟 [︁ ℒtrain (︁ 𝑀 𝑟 (𝑥 𝑟 , 𝑖 ; 𝜃 𝑟 ), 𝑎 )︁]︁ . (4) 

4.3. Trigger Projector and Classifier Co-training 

To enable reliable ownership verification, we design the trigger projector 𝑃 𝑡 (·) that facilitates the classifier head 𝐻 𝑐 (·) in distinguishing the protected watermarked model 𝑀 𝑤 from other models. To support this discrimination, we incorporate a clean model 𝑀 𝑐 and a noise model 𝑀 𝑟 as auxiliary references, which help ensure the reliability of verification. 

Triplet Loss. Inspired by contrastive learning Chen et al. (2020), He et al. (2020), Grill et al. (2020), we employ a triplet loss to structure the representation space learned by the trigger projector 𝑃 𝑡 . Specifically, each model extracts visual features from the observation as ℎ = 𝑉 (𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ), and the trigger projector maps them to visual tokens 𝑣 = 𝑃 𝑡 (ℎ; 𝜓 ). Let 𝑣 𝑐 , 𝑣 𝑤 , and 𝑣 𝑟 denote the projected visual tokens from the clean, watermarked, and noise models, respectively. We designate 𝑣 𝑐 as the anchor, 𝑣 𝑟 as the positive, and 𝑣 𝑤 as the negative. The triplet loss imposes a margin-based constraint that encourages proximity between 𝑣 𝑐 and 𝑣 𝑟 ,while enforcing greater separation between 𝑣 𝑐 and 𝑣 𝑤 , formulated as: 

ℒtri (𝜓 ) = [︂ 𝑑 (𝑣 𝑐 , 𝑣 𝑟 ) − 𝑑 (𝑣 𝑐 , 𝑣 𝑤 ) + 𝛼 ]︂ +

, (5) where 𝛼 is a margin hyper-parameter, [·]+ = max (·, 0 ) denotes the hinge operator, and 𝑑 (·, ·) denotes the normalized Euclidean distance defined as: 

ˆ𝑣 = 𝑣 

‖𝑣 ‖2

, 𝑑 (𝑣 𝑖 , 𝑣 𝑗 ) = ⃦⃦⃦ ˆ𝑣 𝑖 − ˆ𝑣 𝑗 ⃦⃦⃦ 2. (6) 

Binary Cross-Entropy Loss. After obtaining the visual tokens 𝑣 , we combine them with the instruction tokens 𝑖 and feed them into the large language model 𝐿 (·) to produce a latent representation 𝑧 = 𝐿 (𝑣 , 𝑖 ).The latent representation 𝑧 is then passed to a classifier head 𝐻 𝑐 (·), which outputs prediction probabilities 𝑝 

indicating the presence of the embedded watermark. The trigger projector and classifier are trained using a binary cross-entropy objective over the outputs corresponding to the watermarked, clean, and noise models: 

ℒcls (𝜓 , 𝜔 ) = ℒbce (𝑝 𝑤 , 1 ) + ℒbce (𝑝 𝑐 , 0 ) + ℒbce (𝑝 𝑟 , 0 ) (7) where 𝑝 𝑤 , 𝑝 𝑐 , and 𝑝 𝑟 denote the prediction probabilities for the watermarked, clean, and noise models, respectively, and ℒbce (·, ·) denotes the binary cross-entropy loss. 

Joint Optimization Objective. The trigger projector and classifier head are jointly optimized by minimizing the following objective: 

min  

> 𝜓 ,𝜔

E(𝑥 ,𝑖 ,𝑎 )∼𝒟 [︂ ℒcls (𝜓 , 𝜔 ) + 𝜆 ℒtri (𝜓 )]︂ (8) where 𝜓 and 𝜔 denote the parameters of the trigger projector and classifier head, respectively, and 𝜆 is a weighting factor. 

> 7

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

4.4. Swap-and-Detect Ownership Verification 

During ownership verification, we adopt a swap-and-detect mechanism that determines the model status based on its behavior under two operation modes. Table 1 summarizes the possible verification outcomes under this protocol. 

Performance Test. Under benign mode, we first evaluate the task success rate SR of the model 𝑀 . We define a threshold 𝜏 sr to assess acceptable task performance. If SR (𝑀 ) < 𝜏 sr , the model is considered crashed; otherwise, if SR (𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜏 sr , the model is considered to operate normally. 

Watermark Detection. Once the model is confirmed to operate normally, we switch it to the trigger mode by replacing the original projector with the trigger projector and attaching the classifier head. The classifier outputs a watermark identification confidence, denoted as WIC (𝑀 ), which reflects the average classifier probability of identifying the model as watermarked. We define a threshold 𝜏 wic : if WIC (𝑀 ) < 𝜏 wic , the model is considered unwatermarked; otherwise, the model is identified as a copy of the protected open-source model. The calibration procedures and theoretical analyses for selecting 𝜏 sr and 𝜏 wic are provided in Appendix B.     

> Table 1: Verification outcomes under the swap-and-detect protocol.
> Benign Mode Trigger Mode Interpretation Verification
> SR

(𝑀 ) < 𝜏 sr – Task performance fails Crashed 

> SR

(𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜏 sr WIC (𝑀 ) < 𝜏 wic No watermark evidence Unwatermarked 

> SR

(𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜏 sr WIC (𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜏 wic Watermark evidence detected Watermarked 

## 5. Experiments 

5.1. Experimental Setup Models. We evaluate GuardVLA on three representative vision-language-action models. OpenVLA-OFT Kim et al. (2025a) is a widely adopted open-source VLA model that incorporates the advanced fine-tuning strategy OFT Kim et al. (2025a). VLA-Adapter Wang et al. (2025c) represents a compact yet competitive VLA architecture, leveraging the lightweight Qwen2.5-0.5B Team et al. (2024). 𝜋 0.5 , from the 𝜋 0 model family Black et al. (2024), is based on a flow-matching Lipman et al. (2023) action generation paradigm, exhibiting strong cross-embodiment generalization and effective downstream adaptation. 

Datasets. We adopt the widely used LIBERO benchmark Liu et al. (2023), which covers a diverse range of embodied manipulation tasks. LIBERO consists of 4 task suites, including LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Object, LIBERO-Goal, and LIBERO-10, enabling comprehensive evaluation across different levels of task complexity. Additional details about the datasets are provided in Appendix F. 

Metrics. We evaluate GuardVLA with two metrics for benign and trigger modes. In benign mode, model fidelity is measured by the success rate (SR), which quantifies the ability of the model to complete downstream tasks. In trigger mode, watermark detectability is measured by the watermark identification confidence (WIC), defined as the average classifier probability of identifying the queried model as watermarked. 

Implementation Details. During the watermark embedding phase, we set the message length to 6 and fine-tune all three models following the official training configurations. During the trigger projector and classifier co-training phase, we train for only 2,000 steps, set the margin hyper-parameter 𝛼 to 0.5 for the 

> 8

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models triplet loss, and use weighting factors 𝜆 = 2.0 for OpenVLA-OFT and 𝜋 0.5 , and 𝜆 = 8.0 for VLA-Adapter in the overall objective. During the ownership verification phase, we compute SR under benign mode following the LIBERO protocol, while in trigger mode we conduct 50 trials per task and record 10 classifier probability outputs for each trial. More details are provided in Appendix C and D. 

5.2. Watermark Effectiveness 

We evaluate GuardVLA on OpenVLA-OFT, VLA-Adapter, and 𝜋 0.5 by assessing task preservation and ownership verification across LIBERO task suites. We use visual steganography for OpenVLA-OFT and VLA-Adapter, and parameterized image warping Nguyen and Tran (2021) for 𝜋 0.5 . Additional image-warping results on OpenVLA-OFT are provided in Appendix H, further demonstrating the compatibility of GuardVLA with different secret injection strategies. 

Model Fidelity. We evaluate model fidelity under benign mode using success rate (SR). To avoid additional training bias, we adopt officially released checkpoints as clean models for comparison. As shown in Table 2, GuardVLA does not compromise benign task performance across LIBERO suites. The watermarked OpenVLA-OFT improves the SR on the Object suite from 98.2% to 99.4%, while VLA-Adapter achieves a notable gain on the challenging LIBERO-10 suite, increasing from 89.8% to 93.4%. As shown in Table 3, GuardVLA also preserves the performance of 𝜋 0.5 under image-warping-based watermarking. The watermarked 𝜋 0.5 achieves comparable SR on Spatial, Goal, and Object, and improves LIBERO-10 performance from 90.8% to 94.2%. These results indicate that GuardVLA preserves normal task execution across different VLA architectures and task suites. 

Watermark Detectability. We evaluate watermark detectability under trigger mode using watermark identification confidence (WIC). As shown in Table 2, for OpenVLA-OFT and VLA-Adapter, the protected models consistently achieve watermark identification confidence (WIC) above 99.9%, whereas clean and noise models remain below 0.1%. For 𝜋 0.5 , the watermarked model achieves 99.85% WIC, while the clean and noise models achieve only 0.03% and 0.01%. This large margin demonstrates that the proposed trigger-mode verification provides clear separation between watermarked and non-watermarked models. Overall, these results confirm that GuardVLA supports reliable ownership verification across different VLA architectures and task distributions.                                                              

> Table 2: Performance comparison under different VLA architectures on the LIBERO dataset.
> Model Scenario Spatial Goal Object 10
> SR (%) WIC (%) SR (%) WIC (%) SR (%) WIC (%) SR (%) WIC (%) OpenVLA-OFT Clean 99.6 0.01 96.6 0.00 98.2 0.60 94.4 0.00 Watermarked 96.8 100.00 96.2 99.72 99.4 100.00 91.8 99.99 Noise 95.8 0.13 97.0 0.00 98.6 0.02 91.6 0.01 VLA-Adapter Clean 95.2 0.12 97.2 0.50 98.6 0.04 89.8 0.01 Watermarked 95.4 99.94 96.8 99.85 98.4 100.00 93.4 99.90 Noise 96.2 0.11 96.6 0.42 98.2 0.00 82.0 0.03

5.3. Robustness against Downstream Fine-tuning 

We further evaluate the robustness of GuardVLA by adapting the watermarked models across different datasets and fine-tuning strategies, and examining whether the embedded watermark remains detectable after 

> 9

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

Table 3: Performance of 𝜋 0.5 under different scenarios on the LIBERO benchmark.                         

> Model Scenario Spatial Goal Object 10 WIC (%)
> SR (%) SR (%) SR (%) SR (%)
> 𝜋 0.5
> Clean 97.4 96.8 98.4 90.8 0.03 Watermarked 99.0 96.0 98.2 94.2 99.85 Noise 89.8 96.6 97.2 90.6 0.01

post-release adaptations. A detailed theoretical justification for watermark persistence under downstream fine-tuning is provided in Appendix A. 

Cross-Dataset Fine-Tuning. We start from a watermarked model trained on the LIBERO-10 suite, and subsequently adapt it to LIBERO-Spatial. As shown in Figure 4 (a), the success rate (SR) initially starts at a lower level, then increases rapidly, and eventually stabilizes near 99% on the target Spatial tasks. In contrast, the watermark identification confidence (WIC) remains consistently close to 100% throughout the entire adaptation process. These results indicate that the embedded watermark can survive continued task-driven parameter updates across different task suites. 

Cross-Method Fine-Tuning. We start from the watermarked model trained on LIBERO-10 and further fine-tune it on watermark-free LIBERO-10 data, while reducing the number of visual inputs from two views to a single view. As shown in Figure 4 (b), the SR steadily increases and eventually stabilizes around 85%-87%, with the lower final performance mainly caused by the reduced visual input. In contrast, the WIC remains close to 100% during the whole process. These results indicate that GuardVLA preserves reliable ownership evidence under substantially altered fine-tuning strategies. (a) Cross -Dataset Fine -tuning Robustness Test   

> Fine -tuning Step
> Accuracy
> Accuracy
> Fine -tuning Step
> (b) Cross -Method Fine -tuning Robustness Test

Figure 4: Robustness of GuardVLA under post-release adaptation : (a) Cross-dataset fine-tuning from LIBERO-10 to LIBERO-Spatial. (b) Cross-method fine-tuning with reduced visual inputs. The shaded area around the WIC curve denotes the variance across trials. 

## 6. Discussion 

This section provides additional analyses on GuardVLA. We examine trigger-module design choices, evaluate resistance to watermark suppression strategies, and explore an extension to behavior-level watermark detection. Sensitivity analyses of key hyper-parameters are provided in Appendix I. 

> 10

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

6.1. Ablation Study 

We examine different trigger modules for watermark detection on LIBERO-Spatial. As shown in Table 4, using only a classifier head severely overfits: when evaluated on an alternative official clean model, it yields 98% WIC, rendering it indistinguishable from the protected model and underscoring the necessity of an explicit trigger mechanism. We further compare the vision backbone featurizer and the projector as trigger modules. Both achieve near-perfect detection, with nearly 100% WIC for the watermarked model and below 0.3% for clean and noise models. However, the projector-based design introduces substantially lower parameter overhead than the featurizer. Since the model protection platform must store distinct ownership keys for different protected models, the lighter design is more practical. Overall, the projector-classifier configuration is selected due to its strong detectability and deployment efficiency.                    

> Table 4: Trigger-module ablation study with parameter budgets and watermark detectability.
> Module Params Clean Watermarked Noise
> WIC (%) WIC (%) WIC (%) classifier head 289M 98.01 ±0.56 99.90 ±0.16 0.02 ±0.01 w/ featurizer 876M 0.00 ±0.00 100.00 ±0.03 0.24 ±0.09 w/ projector 427M 0.01 ±0.01 100.00 ±0.00 0.13 ±0.06

6.2. Resistance to Watermark Suppression 

We further investigate whether different watermark suppression strategies can remove the ownership evidence. We consider three representative attacks, including weight quantization, knowledge distillation, and a projector-invariant adaptive attack. Experimental details are provided in Appendix E. 

Weight Quantization. We apply INT4 weight quantization to examine whether strong model compression can suppress the embedded watermark. Quantization reduces the numerical precision of model weights and may disturb learned watermark-related representations. 

Knowledge Distillation. Following DySL-VLA Yang et al. (2026), we perform self distillation by transferring intermediate representations and action outputs from the original model to a student policy. This attack aims to reconstruct the normal task behavior of the protected model while potentially discarding hidden watermark-related features. 

Projector-Invariant Adaptive Attack. We further design an adaptive attack that explicitly suppresses the representation gap between benign and trigger projectors. The attacker optimizes the model to make the trigger-mode representation closer to the benign-mode representation, aiming to weaken the separability used by our verification mechanism. As shown in Table 5, GuardVLA remains robust under all tested watermark suppression strategies, with WIC staying close to 100%. Meanwhile, all attacks lead to a certain degree of SR degradation, suggesting that the watermark is difficult to remove without compromising normal task performance. 

6.3. Extension: Behavior-Level Watermark Detection 

To enhance the observability and interpretability of watermark verification, we extend probability-based detection to the behavior level, where model ownership is inferred directly from distinctive end-effector 

> 11

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models            

> Table 5: Resistance against different adaptive attacks and model compression strategies.
> Attack SR (%) WIC (%)
> No Attack 96.8 100.0 ±0.00
> Weight Quantization (INT4) 86.4 100.0 ±0.00
> Knowledge Distillation (Yang et al., 2026) 93.2 100.0 ±0.00
> Projector-Invariant Fine-tuning 86.6 100.0 ±0.02

motion patterns induced by the backdoor trigger. Specifically, a trigger projector together with a backdoor action head is employed to activate the backdoor and generate characteristic action behaviors. Similar to the probability-based variant, training combines supervised and contrastive objectives. Details of the experimental setup and additional visualizations are provided in Appendix J. As shown in Figure 5, all three models exhibit similar trajectories and successfully complete downstream tasks under benign mode. Under trigger mode, however, the clean and noise models follow consistent motion patterns, while the watermarked model produces clearly divergent trajectories. This separation indicates that ownership can be verified directly from end-effector motion behaviors. Noise Model Clean Model Watermarked Model  

> Figure 5: Behavior-level watermark verification : End-effector trajectories of clean, watermarked, and noise models under benign and trigger modes. All models exhibit similar motions during benign execution, while only the watermarked model produces distinctive trajectories under trigger mode, enabling ownership verification from robot behaviors.

## 7. Conclusion 

In this paper, we present GuardVLA, a backdoor-based ownership verification framework tailored to vision-language-action models. GuardVLA embeds secret messages into embodied visual data during protection-aware fine-tuning and uses a swap-and-detect mechanism to activate owner-specific evidence only during verification. Experiments across multiple VLA architectures show that GuardVLA can preserve benign task performance while enabling reliable watermark detection under the evaluated adaptation and suppression settings. 

> 12

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

## References 

Yossi Adi, Carsten Baum, Moustapha Cisse, Benny Pinkas, and Joseph Keshet. Turning your weakness into a strength: Watermarking deep neural networks by backdooring. In 27th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 18) , pages 1615–1631, 2018. Shumeet Baluja. Hiding images in plain sight: Deep steganography. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. 𝜋 0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. corr, abs/2410.24164, 2024. doi: 10.48550. arXiv preprint ARXIV.2410.24164 , 2024. Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Ipguard: Protecting intellectual property of deep neural networks via fingerprinting the classification boundary. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM asia conference on computer and communications security , pages 14–25, 2021. Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. Simclr: A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Learning Representations .PMLR New York, NY, USA, 2020. StarVLA Community. Starvla: A lego-like codebase for vision-language-action model developing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.05014 , 2026. Tianshuo Cong, Xinlei He, and Yang Zhang. Sslguard: A watermarking scheme for self-supervised learning pre-trained encoders. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pages 579–593, 2022. Yingqian Cui, Jie Ren, Han Xu, Pengfei He, Hui Liu, Lichao Sun, Yue Xing, and Jiliang Tang. Diffusionshield: A watermark for copyright protection against generative diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04642 ,2023. Weitao Feng, Wenbo Zhou, Jiyan He, Jie Zhang, Tianyi Wei, Guanlin Li, Tianwei Zhang, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. Aqualora: toward white-box protection for customized stable diffusion models via watermark lora. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 13423–13444, 2024. Roya Firoozi, Johnathan Tucker, Stephen Tian, Anirudha Majumdar, Jiankai Sun, Weiyu Liu, Yuke Zhu, Shuran Song, Ashish Kapoor, Karol Hausman, et al. Foundation models in robotics: Applications, challenges, and the future. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 44(5):701–739, 2025. Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33: 21271–21284, 2020. Peng Hao, Chaofan Zhang, Dingzhe Li, Xiaoge Cao, Xiaoshuai Hao, Shaowei Cui, and Shuo Wang. Tla: Tactile-language-action model for contact-rich manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08548 , 2025. Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9729–9738, 2020. 

> 13

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models Moo Jin Kim, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. Fine-tuning vision-language-action models: Optimizing speed and success. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19645 , 2025a. Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2679–2713. PMLR, 2025b. Martin S Laursen, Jannik S Pedersen, Søren A Just, Thiusius R Savarimuthu, Brian Blomholt, Jakob KH Andersen, and Pernille J Vinholt. Factors facilitating the acceptance of diagnostic robots in healthcare: A survey. In 2022 IEEE 10th International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI) , pages 442–448. IEEE, 2022. Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In 11th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023 , 2023. Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 44776–44791, 2023. Yueen Ma, Zixing Song, Yuzheng Zhuang, Jianye Hao, and Irwin King. A survey on vision-language-action models for embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14093 , 2024. Oier Mees, Dibya Ghosh, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Homer Rich Walke, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 , 2024. Tuan Anh Nguyen and Anh Tuan Tran. Wanet - imperceptible warping-based backdoor attack. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collaboration 0. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 6892–6903. IEEE, 2024. Jiahuan Pei, Irene Viola, Haochen Huang, Junxiao Wang, Moonisa Ahsan, Fanghua Ye, Jiang Yiming, Yao Sai, Di Wang, Zhumin Chen, et al. Autonomous workflow for multimodal fine-grained training assistants towards mixed reality. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024 , pages 4051–4066, 2024. Sen Peng, Yufei Chen, Cong Wang, and Xiaohua Jia. Intellectual property protection of diffusion models via the watermark diffusion process. In International Conference on Web Information Systems Engineering ,pages 290–305. Springer, 2025. Zirui Peng, Shaofeng Li, Guoxing Chen, Cheng Zhang, Haojin Zhu, and Minhui Xue. Fingerprinting deep neural networks globally via universal adversarial perturbations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 13430–13439, 2022. Delin Qu, Haoming Song, Qizhi Chen, Yuanqi Yao, Xinyi Ye, Yan Ding, Zhigang Wang, JiaYuan Gu, Bin Zhao, Dong Wang, et al. Spatialvla: Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15830 , 2025. 

> 14

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, brian ichter, Michael Robert Equi, Liyiming Ke, Karl Pertsch, Quan Vuong, James Tanner, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Niccolo Fusai, Adrian Li-Bell, Danny Driess, Lachy Groom, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with hierarchical vision-language-action models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Mustafa Shukor, Dana Aubakirova, Francesco Capuano, Pepijn Kooijmans, Steven Palma, Adil Zouitine, Michel Aractingi, Caroline Pascal, Martino Russi, Andres Marafioti, et al. Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for affordable and efficient robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844 , 2025. Matthew Tancik, Ben Mildenhall, and Ren Ng. Stegastamp: Invisible hyperlinks in physical photographs. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2117–2126, 2020. Gemini Robotics Team, Saminda Abeyruwan, Joshua Ainslie, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, Travis Armstrong, Ashwin Balakrishna, Robert Baruch, Maria Bauza, Michiel Blokzijl, et al. Gemini robotics: Bringing ai into the physical world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20020 , 2025. Qwen Team et al. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671 , 2(3), 2024. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023. Shaoan Wang, Jiazhao Zhang, Minghan Li, Jiahang Liu, Anqi Li, Kui Wu, Fangwei Zhong, Junzhi Yu, Zhizheng Zhang, and He Wang. Trackvla: Embodied visual tracking in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23189 ,2025a. Taowen Wang, Cheng Han, James Liang, Wenhao Yang, Dongfang Liu, Luna Xinyu Zhang, Qifan Wang, Jiebo Luo, and Ruixiang Tang. Exploring the adversarial vulnerabilities of vision-language-action models in robotics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 6948–6958, 2025b. Yihao Wang, Pengxiang Ding, Lingxiao Li, Can Cui, Zirui Ge, Xinyang Tong, Wenxuan Song, Han Zhao, Wei Zhao, Pengxu Hou, et al. Vla-adapter: An effective paradigm for tiny-scale vision-language-action model. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.09372 , 2025c. Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Minjie Zhu, Zhibin Tang, Kun Wu, Zhiyuan Xu, Ning Liu, Ran Cheng, Chaomin Shen, et al. Tinyvla: Towards fast, data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. Zebin Yang, Yijiahao Qi, Tong Xie, Bo Yu, Shaoshan Liu, and Meng Li. Dysl-vla: Efficient vision-language-action model inference via dynamic-static layer-skipping for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22896 ,2026. Shengfang Zhai, Yinpeng Dong, Qingni Shen, Shi Pu, Yuejian Fang, and Hang Su. Text-to-image diffusion models can be easily backdoored through multimodal data poisoning. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 1577–1587, 2023. Borong Zhang, Yuhao Zhang, Jiaming Ji, Yingshan Lei, Josef Dai, Yuanpei Chen, and Yaodong Yang. Safevla: Towards safety alignment of vision-language-action model via constrained learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03480 , 2025. 

> 15

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Shuaiyi Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Hal Daumé III, Andrey Kolobov, Furong Huang, and Jianwei Yang. TraceVLA: Visual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal awareness for generalist robotic policies. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Yifan Zhong, Xuchuan Huang, Ruochong Li, Ceyao Zhang, Zhang Chen, Tianrui Guan, Fanlian Zeng, Ka Num Lui, Yuyao Ye, Yitao Liang, et al. Dexgraspvla: A vision-language-action framework towards general dexterous grasping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20900 , 2025. Xueyang Zhou, Guiyao Tie, Guowen Zhang, Hechang Wang, Pan Zhou, and Lichao Sun. Badvla: Towards backdoor attacks on vision-language-action models via objective-decoupled optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16640 , 2025. Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. 

> 16

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

## A. Theoretical Analysis of Watermark Persistence under Fine-tuning 

We provide a formal justification that the GuardVLA watermark remains detectable after downstream fine-tuning, as long as the adaptation is moderate and does not explicitly optimize against the verification mechanism. 

Lemma A.1. Bounded Parameter Drift under Downstream Fine-tuning Let 𝜃 𝑤 denote a watermarked model obtained by minimizing Eq. 2 on the protected training distribution with watermarked observations: 

𝑥 𝑠 = 𝑥 ob + 𝛿 𝑠 , 𝛿 𝑠 = 𝐸 𝜑 (𝑚 𝑠 , 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ). (9) 

Suppose an adversary fine-tunes 𝜃 𝑤 on a new dataset 𝒟 ′ without watermark injection, using stochastic gradient descent: 

𝜃 𝑡 +1 = 𝜃 𝑡 − 𝜂 𝑡 𝑔 𝑡 , (10) 

where 𝑔 𝑡 = ∇𝜃 ℒft is the stochastic gradient at step 𝑡 , and assume ‖𝑔 𝑡 ‖ ≤ 𝐺 for all 𝑡 .If the learning-rate scheduler satisfies ∑︀ 𝑇 −1 

> 𝑡 =0

𝜂 𝑡 ≤ 𝑆 , then after 𝑇 steps, 

‖𝜃 𝑇 − 𝜃 𝑤 ‖ ≤ 𝐺𝑆 . (11) 

Proof. By telescoping the SGD updates, 

𝜃 𝑇 − 𝜃 𝑤 = 

> 𝑇 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

(𝜃 𝑡 +1 − 𝜃 𝑡 ) = − 

> 𝑇 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

𝜂 𝑡 𝑔 𝑡 . (12) Taking norms and applying the triangle inequality yields 

‖𝜃 𝑇 − 𝜃 𝑤 ‖ ≤  

> 𝑇 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

𝜂 𝑡 ‖𝑔 𝑡 ‖ ≤ 𝐺  

> 𝑇 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

𝜂 𝑡 ≤ 𝐺𝑆 . (13) 

Lemma A.2. Margin-Induced Robustness of Trigger-Mode Detector. Let 𝑠 𝜃 (𝑥 ob , 𝑖 ) denote the watermark logit produced in trigger mode by the swap-and-detect verification pipeline: 

𝑠 𝜃 (𝑥 ob , 𝑖 ) = logit (︁ 𝐻 𝑐 (︁ 𝐿 (︁ 𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑡 (𝑉 (𝑥 ob ; 𝜃 ); 𝜓 ))︁ ; 𝜃 , 𝜔 )︁)︁ . (14) 

Assume that after training with the triplet loss in Eq. 5, and cross-entropy loss in Eq. 7, there exists a positive detection margin ∆ > 0 such that: 

E[𝑠 𝜃 𝑤 ] − E[𝑠 𝜃 𝑐 ] ≥ ∆, E[𝑠 𝜃 𝑤 ] − E[𝑠 𝜃 𝑟 ] ≥ ∆, (15) 

where 𝜃 𝑐 and 𝜃 𝑟 are the clean and noise baselines defined in Eq. 3 and Eq. 4. Further assume that 𝑠 𝜃 is Lipschitz-continuous with respect to model parameters: there exists 𝐿 𝑠 > 0 such that for any 𝜃 , 𝜃 ′,

|𝑠 𝜃 (𝑥 ob , 𝑖 ) − 𝑠 𝜃 ′ (𝑥 ob , 𝑖 )| ≤ 𝐿 𝑠 ‖𝜃 − 𝜃 ′‖. (16) 

> 17

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

Then for any 𝜃 ′ satisfying, 

‖𝜃 ′ − 𝜃 𝑤 ‖ < ∆

2𝐿 𝑠 

, (17) 

the trigger-mode classifier with threshold 𝜏 wic will still identify 𝜃 ′ as watermarked, i.e., 

WIC (𝑀 (·; 𝜃 ′)) ≥ 𝜏 wic . (18) 

Proof. From the Lipschitz condition, 

|𝑠 𝜃 ′ − 𝑠 𝜃 𝑤 | ≤ 𝐿 𝑠 ‖𝜃 ′ − 𝜃 𝑤 ‖. (19) If ‖𝜃 ′ − 𝜃 𝑤 ‖ < ∆/(2𝐿 𝑠 ), then 

𝑠 𝜃 ′ ≥ 𝑠 𝜃 𝑤 − ∆/2. (20) Combining this with the margin assumption, 

E[𝑠 𝜃 ′ ] − E[𝑠 𝜃 𝑐 ] ≥ ∆/2 > 0, (21) and similarly for 𝜃 𝑟 .Therefore the decision boundary calibrated during training remains valid, and the resulting watermark identification confidence exceeds 𝜏 wic .

Lemma A.3. Persistence of GuardVLA Watermarks after Fine-tuning Let 𝜃 𝑤 be a protected model trained with watermarked observation 𝑥 𝑠 = 𝑥 ob + 𝛿 𝑠 and with the trigger-mode classifier optimized by Eq. 8. Suppose an adversary fine-tunes 𝜃 𝑤 on a watermark-free dataset 𝒟 ′ for 𝑇 steps using SGD, producing 𝜃 𝑇 . If: (1) the parameter drift satisfies the bound in Lemma A.1, i.e., 

‖𝜃 𝑇 − 𝜃 𝑤 ‖ ≤ 𝐺𝑆 , (22) 

(2) the detector margin ∆ from Lemma A.2 obeys, 

𝐿 𝑠 𝐺𝑆 < ∆/2, (23) 

then the watermark remains detectable after fine-tuning: 

WIC (𝑀 (·; 𝜃 𝑇 )) ≥ 𝜏 wic . (24) 

Proof. Lemma A.1 bounds the deviation between 𝜃 𝑇 and 𝜃 𝑤 .Lemma A.2 ensures that this deviation lies within the robustness radius. Therefore, when evaluated in trigger mode via swap-and-detect, the fine-tuned mode still produces watermark logits separated from the clean and noise baselines, leading to WIC above the decision threshold 𝜏 wic .

> 18

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

## B. Calibrating 𝜏 sr and 𝜏 wic in Swap-and-Detect Verification 

We describe principled procedures for selecting the benign-mode gate 𝜏 sr and the trigger-mode watermark threshold 𝜏 wic used in the swap-and-detect protocol. The goal is to filter severely degraded models before entering trigger mode and to control false watermark claims while remaining robust to moderate downstream fine-tuning. 

B.1. Choosing 𝜏 sr via a one-sided test against degraded performance 

Let ̂︂ 𝑆𝑅 (𝑀 ) be the empirical benign success rate estimated from 𝑛 rollouts, ̂︂ 

𝑆𝑅 (𝑀 ) = 1

𝑛 

> 𝑛 ∑︁
> 𝑗 =1

𝑌 𝑗 , 𝑌 𝑗 ∈ { 0, 1 }. (25) The threshold 𝜏 sr is used solely to filter severely degraded or crashed models and is not intended to compare clean and watermarked checkpoints. We define a model to be crashed if its true benign success probability satisfies 𝑝 (𝑀 ) ≤ 𝑝 min , where 𝑝 min ∈ (0, 1 )

is an operational floor determined by the difficulty of the evaluation suite. We consider the one-sided hypotheses 

𝐻 0 : 𝑝 (𝑀 ) ≤ 𝑝 min , 𝐻 1 : 𝑝 (𝑀 ) > 𝑝 min , (26) and accept the model as usable whenever ̂︂ 𝑆𝑅 (𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜏 sr .Since ̂︂ 𝑆𝑅 (𝑀 ) is the mean of Bernoulli variables, Hoeffding’s inequality yields: 

Pr (︁̂︂ 𝑆𝑅 (𝑀 ) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑀 ) + 𝜖 )︁ ≤ exp (−2𝑛𝜖 2). (27) Fix 𝛿 sr ∈ (0, 1 ) and define 

𝜏 sr = 𝑝 min +√︃ ln (1/𝛿 sr )

2𝑛 . (28) If 𝑝 (𝑀 ) ≤ 𝑝 min , then 

Pr (︁̂︂ 𝑆𝑅 (𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜏 sr )︁ ≤ 𝛿 sr , (29) so a degraded model is rejected by the benign gate with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 sr . Conversely, if 𝑝 (𝑀 ) ≥

𝑝 min + 𝛾 for some 𝛾 > 0, then 

Pr (︁̂︂ 𝑆𝑅 (𝑀 ) < 𝜏 sr )︁ ≤ exp (︂ −2𝑛 (︁ 𝛾 −√︁ ln (1/𝛿 sr ) 

> 2𝑛 )︁
> 2)︂

, (30) showing that the false rejection probability decays exponentially in 𝑛 whenever the margin 𝛾 is non-negligible. We adopt either an absolute floor reflecting minimal operability for a suite, or a relative floor 𝑝 min = 𝜅 ̂︂ 𝑆𝑅 clean 

computed once from an official clean checkpoint, with 𝜅 ∈ (0, 1 ) chosen conservatively. This does not require the queried model to outperform the clean model and only treats models far below the normal regime as degraded. 

> 19

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

B.2. Choosing 𝜏 wic via a quantile rule with finite-sample control 

Under trigger mode, the classifier head attached to the trigger projector outputs watermark identification confidence WIC (𝑀 ). We collect 𝑚 trigger queries and obtain scores {𝑊 𝑘 (𝑀 )}𝑚 𝑘 =1 ⊂ [0, 1 ]. Negative scores are obtained from the clean and noise references 𝑀 𝑐 and 𝑀 𝑟 , forming the pooled set 𝒲 0 = {𝑊 𝑘 (𝑀 𝑐 )}𝑚 𝑘 =1 ∪{𝑊 𝑘 (𝑀 𝑟 )}𝑚 𝑘 =1.We set 

𝜏 wic =̂︀ 𝑄 1−𝛿 wic (𝒲 0), (31) where ̂︀ 𝑄 1−𝛿 wic denotes the empirical (1 − 𝛿 wic ) quantile and 𝛿 wic is the target false watermark claim rate. Let 𝐹 0 be the true CDF of negative scores and ̂︀ 𝐹 0 the empirical CDF computed from 𝑁 0 = |𝒲 0| = 2𝑚 samples. By the Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality, for any 𝜀 > 0,

Pr (︂ sup 

> 𝑤

|̂︀ 𝐹 0(𝑤 ) − 𝐹 0(𝑤 )| > 𝜀 )︂ ≤ 2 exp (−2𝑁 0𝜀 2). (32) With probability at least 1 − 𝛽 , we therefore have 

𝐹 0(𝜏 wic ) ≥ 1 − 𝛿 wic − 𝜀 wic , 𝜀 wic =√︃ ln (2/𝛽 )

2𝑁 0

. (33) Hence an unwatermarked model exceeds 𝜏 wic with probability at most 𝛿 wic + 𝜀 wic with confidence 1 − 𝛽 .

## C. Details of Watermarking Phase 

This section details the complete watermarking phase of GuardVLA. Algorithm 1 provides a unified procedural description of the entire pipeline. We detail the watermark embedding configurations for OpenVLA-OFT and VLA-Adapter, followed by the hyper-parameter settings for projector and classifier co-training. 

C.1. Watermark Embedding 

This phase embeds the backdoor watermark by fine-tuning the target VLA under the owner-specified training recipe. Each training input includes two visual views, and proprioceptive states are enabled. Image augmentation is applied. The embedded binary secret is fixed to 010101 . Training uses distributed data parallelism on two NVIDIA H200 GPUs. 

OpenVLA-OFT Watermarking. For OpenVLA-OFT, the fine-tuning is performed with the base model OpenVLA-7B on the modified LIBERO RLDS data. The action learning objective uses L1 regression with continuous actions. LoRA is used with rank 32. The optimization uses batch size 4, and learning rate 

5 × 10 −4. Training runs for 150,000 steps, with the decay scheduler starting after 100,000 steps. 

VLA-Adepter Watermarking. For VLA-Adapter, the fine-tuning is performed with a lightweight VLM backbone specified by Qwen2.5-0.5B Team et al. (2024). LoRA is enabled with rank 64. The optimization uses batch size 8, learning rate 2 × 10 −4 and runs for 200,000 steps. 

> 20

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

Algorithm 1 Watermarking Phase 

Require: Embodied dataset 𝒟 ; base VLA 𝑀 (·; 𝜃 ) with frozen backbone 𝑉 (·) and LLM 𝐿 (·); steg-embedder 

𝐸 𝜑 (·); target secret 𝑚 𝑠 ; message space ℳ; training loss ℒtrain ; weighting factor 𝜆 ; margin 𝛼 ; steps 𝑇 1

(Phase I) and 𝑇 2 (Phase II). 

Ensure: Protected model 𝑀 𝑤 (·; 𝜃 𝑤 ); surrogate clean model 𝑀 𝑐 (·; 𝜃 𝑐 ); noise model 𝑀 𝑟 (·; 𝜃 𝑟 ); trigger projector 

𝑃 𝑡 (·; 𝜓 ) and classifier head 𝐻 𝑐 (·; 𝜔 ). 

> 1:

// Phase I: Watermark Embedding via Safe Fine-tuning  

> 2:

Compute watermark residual 𝛿 𝑠 ← 𝐸 𝜑 (𝑚 𝑠 ). 

> 3:

for 𝑡 = 1, 2, . . . , 𝑇 1 do  

> 4:

Sample (𝑥 𝑜𝑏 , 𝑖 , 𝑎 ) ∼ 𝒟 . 

> 5:

Watermarked obs: 𝑥 𝑠 ← 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 + 𝛿 𝑠 . 

> 6:

Sample 𝑚 𝑟 ∼ ℳ ∖ { 𝑚 𝑠 }; 𝑥 𝑟 ← 𝑥 𝑜𝑏 + 𝐸 𝜑 (𝑚 𝑟 ). 

> 7:

Update 𝜃 𝑤 by minimizing ℒtrain (𝑀 𝑤 (𝑥 𝑠 , 𝑖 ; 𝜃 𝑤 ), 𝑎 ). ◁ Eq. 2  

> 8:

Update 𝜃 𝑐 by minimizing ℒtrain (𝑀 𝑐 (𝑥 𝑜𝑏 , 𝑖 ; 𝜃 𝑐 ), 𝑎 ). ◁ Eq. 3  

> 9:

Update 𝜃 𝑟 by minimizing ℒtrain (𝑀 𝑟 (𝑥 𝑟 , 𝑖 ; 𝜃 𝑟 ), 𝑎 ). ◁ Eq. 4  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

// Phase II: Trigger Projector and Classifier Co-training  

> 12:

Initialize 𝑃 𝑡 (·; 𝜓 ) and 𝐻 𝑐 (·; 𝜔 ); keep 𝑉 (·) and 𝐿 (·) frozen.  

> 13:

for 𝑡 = 1, 2, . . . , 𝑇 2 do  

> 14:

Sample (𝑥 𝑜𝑏 , 𝑖 , 𝑎 ) ∼ 𝒟 . 

> 15:

Extract visual features ℎ ← 𝑉 (𝑥 𝑜𝑏 ). 

> 16:

Project tokens for each model:  

> 17:

𝑣 𝑐 ← 𝑃 𝑡 (ℎ; 𝜓 ) on 𝑀 𝑐 , 𝑣 𝑤 ← 𝑃 𝑡 (ℎ; 𝜓 ) on 𝑀 𝑤 , 𝑣 𝑟 ← 𝑃 𝑡 (ℎ; 𝜓 ) on 𝑀 𝑟 . 

> 18:

Triplet loss: ℒ𝑡𝑟𝑖 ←[︁ 𝑑 (𝑣 𝑐 , 𝑣 𝑟 ) − 𝑑 (𝑣 𝑐 , 𝑣 𝑤 ) + 𝛼 ]︁ +. ◁ Eq. 5  

> 19:

Classifier probabilities: 𝑝 𝑐 ← 𝐻 𝑐 (𝐿 (𝑣 𝑐 , 𝑖 ); 𝜔 ), 𝑝 𝑤 ← 𝐻 𝑐 (𝐿 (𝑣 𝑤 , 𝑖 ); 𝜔 ), 𝑝 𝑟 ← 𝐻 𝑐 (𝐿 (𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑖 ); 𝜔 ). 

> 20:

ℒ𝑐𝑙𝑠 ← BCE (𝑝 𝑤 , 1 ) + BCE (𝑝 𝑐 , 0 ) + BCE (𝑝 𝑟 , 0 ). ◁ Eq. 7  

> 21:

Joint objective: ℒ ← ℒ 𝑐𝑙𝑠 + 𝜆 ℒ𝑡𝑟𝑖 . ◁ Eq. 8  

> 22:

Update (𝜓 , 𝜔 ) by SGD on ∇𝜓 ,𝜔 ℒ. 

> 23:

end for 

𝜋 0.5 Watermarking. For 𝜋 0.5 , the action target is continuous and optimized with the native 𝜋 0.5 flow-matching objective, using MSE on the denoising velocity with an action horizon of 10. 𝜋 0.5 adopts full-parameter fine-tuning. We train with a global batch size of 256, a peak learning rate of 5 × 10 −5, and 30,000 training steps. EMA decay is set to 0.999. 

C.2. Projector and Classifier Co-training 

This phase trains the trigger projector and classifier head used for watermark activation and detection. Training is performed using three models: a surrogate clean model, the protected watermarked model, and a noise model. The co-training is executed on a single NVIDIA H200 GPU. Visual inputs consist of two views with proprioceptive states, and image augmentation is enabled. A batch size of 4 and a learning rate of 

5 × 10 −4 are adopted. Training runs for 2,000 steps with learning rate decay starting after 1,000 steps. The triplet loss is enabled with margin 𝛼 = 0.5 , and the supervised classification loss is weighted by 𝜆 = 2.0 for 

> 21

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models OpenVLA-OFT and 𝜋 0.5 , and 𝜆 = 8.0 for VLA-Adapter. 

## D. Details of Verification Phase 

This section presents the complete verification procedure of GuardVLA. Algorithm 2 provides a unified description of the pipeline. We describe the performance test protocol across different LIBERO task suites, followed by the watermark detection process. 

Performance Test. For each task suite, we perform 50 rollouts per task with a stabilization period of 10 simulation steps before control begins. Default initial states are used for all trials. The maximum length is suite-dependent: 220 steps for LIBERO-Spatial, 280 for LIBERO-Object, 300 for LIBERO-Goal, and 520 for LIBERO-10. 

Watermark Detection. For each task, we run 50 trials, and within each rollout the classifier head outputs watermark probabilities over 10 environment steps. Watermark identification confidence is obtained by averaging these step-wise probabilities across all trials and tasks. 

Algorithm 2 Verification Phase 

Require: Suspected policy 𝑀 (·; 𝜃 ); benign projector 𝑃 𝑏 ; trigger projector 𝑃 𝑡 (·; 𝜓 ) and classifier head 𝐻 𝑐 (·; 𝜔 );verification task suite 𝒯 ; trials per task 𝑁 ; steps per trial 𝑆 ; thresholds 𝜏 sr and 𝜏 wic .

Ensure: Decision ∈ { Cr ashed , Unwatermarked , Copy }. 

> 1:

// Performance Test  

> 2:

Attach 𝑃 𝑏 to 𝑀 and execute 𝒯 for 𝑁 trials with 𝑆 steps.  

> 3:

Compute success rate SR (𝑀 ). 

> 4:

if SR (𝑀 ) < 𝜏 sr then  

> 5:

return Cr ashed . 

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

// Watermark Detection  

> 8:

Replace 𝑃 𝑏 with 𝑃 𝑡 and attach 𝐻 𝑐 . 

> 9:

Execute 𝒯 for 𝑁 trials with 𝑆 steps.  

> 10:

Compute watermark identification confidence WIC (𝑀 ). 

> 11:

if WIC (𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜏 wic then  

> 12:

return Copy . 

> 13:

else  

> 14:

return Unwatermarked . 

> 15:

end if 

> 22

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

## E. Details of Watermark Suppression Strategies 

We conduct watermark suppression experiments on the OpenVLA-OFT model watermarked on LIBERO-Spatial. Each strategy starts from the protected checkpoint and attempts to remove ownership evidence while retaining benign task performance. We then evaluate SR and WIC following the same protocol as in the main experiments. 

Weight Quantization. We suppress watermark behavior at inference time without further fine-tuning. Specifically, we load the watermarked model with reduced parameter precision using 4-bit quantization, while keeping all other inference settings unchanged, including two-view visual input, proprioceptive input, preprocessing, and action unnormalization. Since this method does not involve optimization or additional training, the suppression strength is controlled solely by the quantization precision. 

Knowledge Distillation. For knowledge distillation, we adopt a self-distillation setup in which the student policy is trainable and the teacher policy is frozen. The teacher is initialized from the same checkpoint as the student by default. Training uses two visual views, proprioceptive input, and image augmentation. The objective combines token-level KL distillation and task supervision: 

ℒ𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑙 = 𝛼 KD ℒKD + 𝛼 CE ℒCE . (34) We use LoRA fine-tuning with rank 32, batch size 8, learning rate 5 × 10 −5, and 400 training steps. A MultiStepLR scheduler is applied with decay starting at step 300 and 𝛾 = 0.1 . The distillation temperature is set to 𝑇 = 1.0 , with 𝛼 KD = 0.9 and 𝛼 CE = 0.1 . This conservative setup aims to weaken hidden watermark-related behaviors while preserving benign task performance. 

Projector-Invariant Adaptive Attack. For the projector-invariant adaptive attack, we update only LoRA-adapted target-policy parameters, while keeping the trigger projector and classifier head frozen. The attack explicitly suppresses the detector response under the trigger path while maintaining the original task objective. The training loss is: 

ℒ𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 = 𝜆 task ℒtask + 𝜆 remove ℒremove . (35) Here, ℒremove is a BCE-based detector suppression loss computed from trigger-path hidden states. The default setting uses two-view visual input, proprioception, and image augmentation. We use LoRA rank 32, batch size 4, learning rate 5 × 10 −4, and up to 1,500 training steps. The loss weights are set to 𝜆 task = 1.0 ,

𝜆 remove = 0.01 . This attack represents a detector-aware removal attempt that directly weakens the separability between benign and trigger-mode representations. 

## F. Details of LIBERO Simulation Benchmarks 

The LIBERO benchmark Liu et al. (2023) provides a diverse set of simulated manipulation tasks organized into four suites: LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Object, LIBERO-Goal, and LIBERO-100. The first three suites contain 10 tasks, while LIBERO-100 consists of 90 short-horizon tasks and 10 long-horizon tasks. Task policies are conditioned solely on the current language instruction. 

> 23

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models Each task is executed for multiple trials to compute average success rates, with 50 repetitions used through-out this work. Visual observations include third-person RGB images and wrist-mounted RGB images, both at a resolution of 224 × 224 × 3. Language instructions are formatted into prompts and provided to the vision-language module together with visual inputs. The model outputs a 7-dimensional continuous control vector that drives a simulated Franka Emika Panda robot arm to perform the corresponding action sequences. Representative language instructions from different LIBERO task suites are illustrated in Figure 6, high-lighting the diversity of spatial manipulation, object relocation, goal-directed behaviors, and long-horizon compositions. Spatial Task Instruction                       

> 1. Pick up the black bowl between the plate and the ramekin and place it on the plate
> 2. Pick up the black bowl next to the ramekin and place it on the plate
> 3. Pick up the black bowl from table center and place it on the plate
> 4. Pick up the black bowl on the cookie box and place it on the plate
> 5. Pick up the black bowl in the top drawer of the wooden cabinet and place it on the plate
> 6. Pick up the black bowl on the ramekin and place it on the plate
> 7. Pick up the black bowl next to the cookie box and place it on the plate
> 8. Pick up the black bowl on the stove and place it on the plate
> 9. Pick up the black bowl next to the plate and place it on the plate
> 10. Pick up the black bowl on the wooden cabinet and place it on the plate
> Object Task Instruction
> 1. Pick up the orange juice and place it in the basket
> 2. Pick up the cream cheese and place it in the basket
> 3. Pick up the salad dressing and place it in the basket
> 4. Pick up the bbq sauce and place it in the basket
> 5. Pick up the ketchup and place it in the basket
> 6. Pick up the tomato sauce and place it in the basket
> 7. Pick up the butter and place it in the basket
> 8. Pick up the milk and place it in the basket
> 9. Pick up the chocolate pudding and place it in the basket
> 10. Pick up the orange juice and place it in the basket

Goal Task Instruction           

> 1. Open the middle drawer of the cabinet
> 2. Put the bowl on the stove
> 3. Put the wine bottle on top of the cabinet
> 4. Open the top drawer and put the bowl inside
> 5. Put the bowl on top of the cabinet
> 6. Push the plate to the front of the stove
> 7. Put the cream cheese in the bowl
> 8. Turn on the stove
> 9. Put the bowl on the plate
> 10. Put the wine bottle on the rack

Long Task Instruction           

> 1. Put both the alphabet soup and the tomato sauce in the basket
> 2. Put both the cream cheese box and the butter in the basket
> 3. Turn on the stove and put the moka pot on it
> 4. Put the black bowl in the bottom drawer of the cabinet and close it
> 5. Put the white mug on the left plate and put the yellow and white mug on the right plate
> 6. Pick up the book and place it in the back compartment of the caddy
> 7. Put the white mug on the plate and put the chocolate pudding to the right of the plate
> 8. Put both the alphabet soup and the cream cheese box in the basket
> 9. Put both moka pots on the stove
> 10. Put the yellow and white mug in the microwave and close it

Figure 6: Language instructions in LIBERO: Representative prompts from the Spatial, Object, Goal, and Long-Horizon task suites, illustrating the diversity of manipulation objectives and compositional reasoning required during evaluation. 

## G. Comparison with Conventional Protection Methods 

To better understand the limitations of conventional protection methods in the VLA setting, we introduce two representative proactive defense methods into the comparison: fingerprinting-based verification and adversarial-example-based output detection. These methods have been widely studied in conventional model protection, where ownership evidence is usually obtained by querying the model with carefully designed inputs and comparing the resulting outputs or response patterns. 

Fingerprinting-based Verification. Fingerprinting-based verification identifies ownership by measuring whether a suspected model produces responses consistent with the protected model on a set of fingerprint queries. This strategy is effective when model outputs are sufficiently discriminative, such as classification labels, logits, or semantic predictions. However, it becomes less reliable for VLAs because different VLA policies may still complete the same task with highly similar action behaviors. As shown in Table 6, the fingerprinting baseline produces only marginal similarity gaps: clean, noise, and post fine-tuned models all obtain scores close to the watermarked model. This weak separability makes reliable attribution difficult. 

Adversarial-example-based Verification. Adversarial-example-based verification examines model re-sponses to specially perturbed inputs. In conventional vision or vision-language models, such perturbations 

24 Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models can expose model-specific decision boundaries or output patterns. However, this assumption does not naturally hold for VLAs. Since VLA outputs are continuous robot actions coupled with task dynamics, local input perturbations may not induce stable or model-specific behavioral differences. In addition, if the pertur-bation causes abnormal action outputs, it may introduce unsafe behaviors during robotic execution. In our comparison, the adversarial-example-based baseline adapted from RoboticAttack Wang et al. (2025b) shows this limitation: the ASR is not uniquely high on the watermarked model and is even higher on clean models, indicating that the induced output pattern is not model-specific. GuardVLA addresses these limitations through a VLA-specific ownership verification design. Instead of relying on weak response-level differences or unsafe behavior-level outputs, GuardVLA embeds a harmless backdoor watermark during training and explicitly decouples benign execution from trigger-mode verification. In benign mode, the model preserves normal robotic behavior; while in trigger mode, ownership evidence is activated only through the dedicated trigger projector and classifier head. This VLA-specific design produces clear separation between watermarked and non-watermarked models, and the watermark remains detectable after downstream fine-tuning.                      

> Table 6: Comparison with conventional protection methods.
> Method Metric Watermarked Clean Noise Post Fine-tuning
> Fingerprinting Similarity 1.000000 0.997875 0.998277 0.998918 Adversarial Example ASR (%) 52.30 76.15 40.55 88.70 GuardVLA WIC (%) 100.00 0.01 0.13 99.96

## H. Compatibility with Different Secret Injection Strategies 

We further examine whether GuardVLA is compatible with different secret injection strategies. In the main experiments, visual steganography encodes a 1D binary secret string for OpenVLA-OFT and VLA-Adapter, while parameterized image warping applies a 2D secret warping matrix for 𝜋 0.5 . These two mechanisms inject ownership evidence in different forms, suggesting that GuardVLA does not rely on a single watermark carrier. To further support this point, we replace visual steganography with parameterized image warping on OpenVLA-OFT and evaluate it on LIBERO-Spatial. As shown in Table 7, image warping preserves benign task performance, with the watermarked model achieving 95.4% SR compared with 96.2% for the clean model. Meanwhile, the watermarked model obtains 100.00% WIC, whereas the clean and noise models remain close to zero. These results demonstrate that GuardVLA remains effective under different watermark embedding mechanisms, confirming its compatibility with different secret injection strategies.  

> Table 7: Compatibility of GuardVLA with image-warping-based watermarking on OpenVLA-OFT.

Scenario SR (%) WIC (%) 

Clean 96.2 0.01 ±0.01 

Watermarked 95.4 100.00 ±0.00 

Noise 93.0 0.00 ±0.00 

> 25

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

## I. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis 

We vary the weighting factor 𝜆 for VLA-Adapter to examine its effect on watermark detectability. As shown in Figure 7, the watermarked model maintains WIC close to 100% across all values of 𝜆 . When 𝜆 < 7.0 , weaker supervision leads to elevated WIC for clean models, reducing separability. When 𝜆 > 9.0 , the contrastive effect weakens and the WIC of noise models rises substantially, increasing the risk of false positives from models embedded with different secrets. Accordingly, 𝜆 = 8.0 is selected for VLA-Adapter. Although 𝜆 requires tuning, training the trigger projector and classifier converges within 2,000 steps, so selecting an appropriate value introduces little practical overhead. Accuracy       

> weighting factor 𝜆
> Figure 7: Weighting-factor sensitivity: Effect of 𝜆 on watermark detectability for VLA-Adapter on LIBERO-10, measured by WIC, with shaded regions indicating variance across trials.

## J. Details of Behavior-Level Watermark Detection 

J.1. Experimental Setup 

The extended behavior-level watermark is trained using an action-regression alignment strategy rather than a classifier-based objective. Three models are involved: a surrogate clean model, a watermarked model, and a noise model. Training is conducted with batch size 4 and learning rate 5 × 10 −4. Only the shared projector is updated via LoRA with rank 32, while all other backbone parameters remain frozen. The objective combines a triplet alignment loss with margin 0.5 and a supervised L1 action-regression loss weighted by 2.0. The triplet loss encourages separable trigger-mode representations, while the L1 loss guides the watermarked model to produce a predefined verification trajectory and constrains the clean and noise models to remain behaviorally inactive under the same trigger. 

J.2. Extended Behavior-Level Verification Results 

The extended visualization in Figure 8 provides a more detailed view of end-effector trajectories, showing the full temporal evolution of robot motions throughout execution. Under trigger mode, the watermarked model follows a distinctly different motion pattern, while the clean and noise models remain closely aligned. The trajectory deviation appears smooth and structured, indicating that the trigger induces a controlled behavioral change instead of destabilizing the policy. These results provide qualitative evidence that behavior-level watermarks can manifest as coherent motion patterns within a single rollout and support the interpretability of the proposed verification mechanism. 

> 26

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models 

## K. Limitation and Future Work 

GuardVLA demonstrates reliable ownership verification while preserving downstream task performance, but several aspects remain to be further improved. The current framework is designed for authorized auditing scenarios and assumes limited access to the model interfaces required by swap-and-detect, rather than purely input-output black-box access. In addition, the trigger projector and classifier are trained with clean, watermarked, and noise variants, which introduces additional preparation cost. Nevertheless, as shown in Table 8, the three fine-tuning variants have comparable costs and can be trained in parallel. In addition, the projector-classifier co-training converges quickly within 2,000 steps and adds limited extra overhead. Reducing auxiliary training cost and improving the transferability of verification modules are promising directions for future work.                      

> Table 8: Training overhead of GuardVLA.
> Stage Variant Steps Runtime GPU Hours
> Fine-tuning Clean 35k 2d 8h 59m 43s 227.98 Fine-tuning Watermarked 35k 2d 8h 44m 16s 226.95 Fine-tuning Noise 35k 2d 9h 8m 17s 228.55 Co-training Projector+Cls 2k 14m 19s 0.12

## L. Social Impact 

This paper studies ownership verification for released vision-language-action models (VLAs) and proposes a watermarking framework to protect intellectual property while preserving normal task performance. The primary positive impact of this work is to support responsible model sharing, discourage unauthorized reuse, and promote a more sustainable embodied intelligence ecosystem. By enabling post-release ownership verification, the proposed method can help legitimate developers trace unauthorized model use without preventing benign research and adaptation. As with other model protection techniques, the proposed framework should be deployed with appropriate governance. Although GuardVLA is designed for defensive ownership verification and keeps normal execution unaffected, improper use of verification mechanisms may introduce practical or procedural risks, especially when applied to safety-sensitive embodied systems. Therefore, careful access control, clear authorization, and transparent auditing procedures are important for responsible deployment. To mitigate these concerns, GuardVLA separates normal execution from the verification process. Ownership evidence is activated only during authorized auditing, while benign execution preserves normal task behavior. The proposed auditing setting also avoids unnecessary full parameter disclosure by relying on limited model interfaces when possible. We emphasize that such mechanisms should be used only by legitimate model developers or trusted protection platforms, together with appropriate disclosure policies and governance procedures. Overall, this work aims to improve the accountability of released VLA systems while encouraging future studies on transparency, regulation, and safeguards for ownership verification technologies. 

> 27

Towards Backdoor-Based Ownership Verification for Vision-Language-Action Models Noise Model  

> Clean Model
> Trigger  Benign Benign Trigger Benign Trigger
> Watermarked Model

Figure 8: Extended behavior-level watermark verification across full trajectories : Visual rollouts and end-effector trajectories of clean, watermarked, and noise models under benign and trigger modes over longer horizons. While all models behave similarly during benign execution, only the watermarked model exhibits consistent and distinctive motion patterns when the trigger is activated, whereas clean and noise models remain unchanged.