Title: Mixtac: A Novel Bio-Inspired Hybrid Tactile Sensor with Synergistic Event-Frame Perception

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.18550v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 03:02:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS

# Mixtac: A Novel Bio-Inspired Hybrid Tactile Sensor with Synergistic Event-Frame Perception 

Yihang Li, Yijin Chen, Junkai Xu, Na Ningguta, Peter B. Shull, Member, IEEE , Shuo Jiang, Member, IEEE ,and Bin He, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract —Vision based and event based tactile sensors are important in robotic manipulation research. However, they suffer from a fundamental tradeoff: vision based sen-sors have low sampling rates, while event based sensors are prone to drift during long term static force estimation. To solve this challenge and achieve human level tactile perception, the novel hybrid event frame tactile sensor (Mixtac) is proposed in this paper by emulating the syn-ergistic function of biological mechanoreceptors, which achieves normal force estimation. The prototype leverages events for high frequency force tracking and frames for long term accuracy. The Frame Guided Event Recurrent Network (FGER-Net) was proposed to fuse the two data streams. Frames were used by the net to correct event drift during training and guide high frequency predictions during inference. Experiments demonstrated an MAE of 0.04 N. This paper could bridge the sampling rate gap from 0 to 500 Hz in current vision based tactile sensors and pave the way for human level robotic manipulation. 

Index Terms —Deep learning, event camera, force estima-tion, sensor fusion, vision-based tactile sensor. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# THE ability for a robot to perceive and respond to physical contact underpins dexterous object manipulation [1], [2]. In particular, achieving human level dexterous performance re-quires the perception of both rapidly changing dynamic forces and stable static forces [3]. Among them, vision-based tactile sensors are widely adopted due to their high integration and compatibility with computer vision pipelines [2], [4]. Accurate perception of dynamic force changes enables rapid adjustment of fingertip force and posture, thereby supporting stable manip-ulation and preventing slip or damage [5]. Conversely, delayed perception can hinder timely control responses and ultimately lead to grasp failure. Therefore, accurate measurement of dynamic force signals requires a high sampling rate [6]. 

This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2024YFB4707600, in part by the National Nat-ural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62573321 and Grant W2441018, and in part by the Shanghai Municipal Commission of Science and Technology under Grant 24511104400. Yihang Li, Yijin Chen, Shuo Jiang, and Bin He are with the Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, the State Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems, and the College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail: jiangshuo@tongji.edu.cn). Peter B. Shull is with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: pshull@sjtu.edu.cn). Shuo Jiang is the corresponding author (e-mail: jiang-shuo@tongji.edu.cn). 

In particular, emulating human tactile vibration perception demands a sampling rate of at least 400 Hz to reliably detect high frequency [7]. Beyond perception, high sampling rates are essential for stable closed-loop force control, as low sampling rates introduce delays that compromise passivity and reduce responsiveness [8]. However, achieving such high sampling rates with vision-based tactile sensors remains difficult without sacrificing com-pactness. Most tactile sensors based on vision rely on frame cameras, yet frame rate and computational constraints preclude the capture of signals at high frequencies [9]. Moreover, ultra high speed frame cameras require large aperture optics to collect sufficient light at short exposure times, making compact integration difficult [10]. Meanwhile, robotic manipulation requires tactile sensors to provide stable force estimation over extended periods. Many tasks last several seconds from initial contact to completion, making long term stability essential. These competing requirements create a fundamental tradeoff in vision based tactile sensing. Frame based sensors support stable static force estimation through rich and absolute spatial information. However, limited frame rates restrict dynamic sensing. Event based sensors capture rapid dynamics with microsecond temporal resolution, while their change based measurements are relative and prone to drift in static or prolonged scenarios. Recently, event based tactile methods have shown clear po-tential for high frequency sensing and slip detection. However, stable long term absolute force estimation remains difficult due to event signals mainly encoding changes in deformation. Funk et al. [11] achieved tangential force estimation, but could not estimate normal force. Mukashev et al. [12] achieved stable force estimation at 500 Hz by using active flickering illumination to generate continuous events. However, this strategy depends on high frequency light modulation. As a result, it increases data redundancy and hardware complexity, much like high speed frame based approaches. Yin et al. [13] demonstrated high frequency force estimation with event cam-eras at 180 Hz. However, this method estimates force changes rather than absolute force, which limits long term stability. In addition, event cameras respond primarily to brightness changes. They therefore produce sparse signals when visual changes are small, such as during static grasping [14]. Long term integration can also accumulate errors and degrade esti-mation accuracy over time [15]. These limitations show that existing event based methods still require further improvement 

> arXiv:2605.18550v1 [eess.IV] 18 May 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS

for tasks such as static grasping. Fusion of frame images and event signals offers a promising way to address these challenges. Frame images and event sig-nals provide complementary information for force estimation. Frame images preserve detailed spatial deformation, whereas event signals capture the rate of deformation. However, fusing the two modalities remains difficult. Parallax causes the two cameras to observe silicone deformation from different view-points and with different spatial offsets, which complicates spatial alignment and hybridization [16]. In addition, the ultra high temporal resolution of event signals creates a major syn-chronization challenge. The mismatch between asynchronous events and synchronous frames further complicates effective fusion for force estimation [17]. A potential solution to this challenge lies in the organization of biological tactile perception. Comprehensive human level tactile perception relies on the complementary functions of different neural receptors. Slow adapting receptors provide stable and persistent signals for static forces. Fast adapting receptors respond selectively to transient dynamic events. Pacinian corpuscles are especially sensitive to vibration and have a bandwidth of about 250 Hz [7]. Based on this biological inspiration, Mixtac is proposed to address the tradeoff between dynamic sensing and long term stability. FGER-Net is further developed to fuse event and frame signals for force estimation (Fig. 2). In summary, the main contributions are as follows: 1) A hybrid tactile sensor named Mixtac was designed and implemented, which can synergistically fuse event and frame data to achieve both high dynamic response and long term estimation stability (Fig. 1(a)). 2) The FGER-Net, a novel deep learning architecture for hybrid tactile data was developed. The network is de-signed to dynamically fuse the two data streams, learning to prioritize the event stream for tracking high-frequency dynamics while primarily relying on the frame stream to ensure stability and accuracy during static force estima-tion, which achieves normal force estimation. 3) Extensive experimental validations were performed, demonstrating the system’s synergistic fusion capability. The sensor achieves high fidelity dynamic force estima-tion and long term force stability (over 25 s). It also robustly handles hybrid force profiles that transition from transient impact to static hold through dynamic weighting of event and frame contributions. 

II. RELATED WORK 

A. Frame Based Optical Tactile Sensor 

Frame based optical tactile sensing has been widely stud-ied. It offers high integration, strong interference immunity. Representative systems include TacTip [18]. Recent work has improved tactile reconstruction and force perception. Gel-Stereo enabled submillimeter tactile point cloud perception for localization and small part insertion [19]. Other studies ex-panded the sensing functions of optical tactile devices. Nozaki and Krebs proposed an optical sensor that measures distance, surface tilt, and contact force [20]. GelStereo 2.0 improved          

> Fig. 1. Hardware design and sensor responses of Mixtac. (a) The overall structural layout of the hardware. (b) A comparison of the sensor’s response to varying indentation forces. From left to right, the panels demonstrate three states: no contact; rapid, high force indentation (resulting in dense event signals and a high magnitude optical flow); and gentle, low force indentation (resulting in sparse event signals and a low magnitude optical flow). TABLE I MIXTAC HARDWARE COMPONENTS
> Component Specifications
> Camera DAVIS346 from Inivation, 346 x 260 px resolu-tion. Housing Custom Design, 3D printed. Camera Screws 1/2.8 in, thread length 2.8 mm. Light module Custom PCB, LED model XL-2835UWC-02. Contact module Shore A-5 for transparent layer. Shore A-5 for black layer. Wire mesh, aperture 0.9 mm, wire diameter 0.18 mm. Marker Glass microspheres, diameter 0.8 mm.

tactile reconstruction under refractive imaging conditions [21]. Compact optical force sensing has also drawn attention. Mo et al. presented a compact soft triaxial optical force sensor for robotic grasping and human robot interaction [22]. Even so, effective force sampling rates usually remain within 10 to 200 Hz. This is still below the bandwidth required for human level high frequency tactile perception, which is about 400 Hz [7]. 

B. Event Based Optical Tactile Sensor 

Event based optical tactile sensing is regarded as a promis-ing route for high sampling perception due to high temporal resolution and low latency response [9]. Update rates above 1 kHz have been reported, but force observability is often incomplete (e.g., shear dominant estimation without reliable normal force recovery) [11], and active flickering illumination IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS 

is frequently required, which weakens the low redundancy advantage of event driven sensing in nearly static condi-tions [12]. Three-dimensional force estimation has also been demonstrated at moderate rates (e.g., 180 Hz), yet the reported contact duration remains short (0.25-1 s) [13]. Although no explicit cause was provided in the original study, this limitation is plausibly related to sparse responses in weak deformation intervals and error accumulation during long horizon integra-tion of differential event signals. 

III. METHODOLOGY 

A. Hardware Components 

1) Contacting Module: The proposed design paradigm for a compact self supporting sensor is realized in the architecture of the contacting module. In this design, the rigid acrylic support plate is eliminated, and support is instead provided by a flexi-ble steel mesh embedded directly within the silicone elastomer. Through this embedded support strategy, the thickness of the contacting module is significantly reduced, while the required supporting effect is maintained. The module is designed to provide stable and information rich deformation cues for force reconstruction. It consists of a transparent sensing silicone layer with randomly dispersed glass microspheres and a black protective layer for ambient light shielding. The 3D microsphere distribution encodes depth dependent strain, while a thickening agent is incorporated to prevent marker sedimentation during curing. In contrast to conventional designs that rely on a rigid acrylic backplate, our sensor embeds a flexible steel mesh support layer within the elastomer to improve structural compliance. To suppress reflection induced noise in event sensing, the inner surface of the transparent silicone is treated by high grit micro sanding. Unlike the coarse anti reflection sanding used in our early acrylic backed prototypes, which caused marker blur, this finer treatment effectively reduces specular reflection while preserving spatial detail. Together, these design choices provide a clearer and higher contrast marker image for robust event frame perception. A random marker layout enhances event responses during deformation. Compared with regular grids, dense random markers provide more motion cues and improve observability of fine-grained dynamics. Multi step fabrication process is further used to ensure a uniform 3D distribution of glass microbeads in the sili-cone matrix. Marker settling caused by density mismatch is mitigated by increasing the viscosity of liquid silicone with a thickening agent, and the resulting degassing difficulty is addressed through mechanical stirring followed by dual stage vacuum pumping. As a result, a transparent and bubble free sensing elastomer is obtained. 

2) Illuminating Module: Stable and uniform lighting is provided by a custom PCB that integrates XL-2835UWC-02 LEDs and follows the design principles established in [23]. A CN5711 driver chip is integrated on the board to ensure stable, adjustable current. The entire component is powered by a standard 5V USB port. 

3) DAVIS346 Event-Frame Camera: The DAVIS346 cam-era simultaneously outputs APS intensity frames and DVS event streams [24]. Under different contact conditions (Fig. 1(b)), event density varies with indentation speed and captures high-frequency dynamics, whereas frame-based opti-cal flow reflects deformation magnitude and provides absolute geometric information. 

B. Signal Processing 

1) Calibrating the Camera: To remove the geometric dis-tortion from the wide angle lens and obtain accurate camera images, the camera’s internal parameters were calibrated. The calibration process based on a standard checkerboard was adopted, which was implemented using the accompanying DV software. 

2) Aligning Data: Precise temporal alignment between event data and force labels is achieved using a software based calibration with mechanical impulses. In the absence of hardware synchronization, a sharp impulse is applied as a shared temporal marker, producing a force peak and an intermittent burst pattern. The event rate trough near transient silicone stillness at maximum deformation is treated as the event side anchor and paired with the force peak; these two timestamps correspond to the same physical contact state. Two impulses at the beginning and end of each trial provide two anchor pairs, (TE1, T F 1) and (TE2, T F 2), where TE∗

and TF ∗ denote event trough and force-peak timestamps, respectively. Assuming a linear clock relation, the mapping parameters ( a, b) are solved from: 

TF 1 = a · TE1 + b (1a) 

TF 2 = a · TE2 + b (1b) The solved a (clock drift) and b (time offset) are then used to map all event timestamps into the force sensor time domain: 

tforce = a · tevent + b (2) This transformation ensures temporal consistency for all sub-sequent samples within each trial. Ground truth normal force is provided by a stationary 6 axis reference sensor. During data collection, Mixtac is rigidly mounted on the reference sensor, and contact is applied using a rigid hemispherical indenter. Owing to the coaxial alignment and rigid coupling between the two sensors, the measured z axis force is treated as the normal contact force, with lateral shear components effectively decoupled. 

3) Frame Guided Event Recurrent Network: Mixtac’s core algorithmic challenge lies in fusing high rate asynchronous events with low rate synchronous frames. Naive frame rate concatenation inherently discards critical temporal dynamics between frames. The fundamental tradeoff is clear: images provide spatially rich absolute deformation data but at insuffi-cient sampling rates, while events provide microsecond level tracking of relative changes but inevitably accumulate drift over time. Inspired by the human tactile system’s synergy of fast and slow adapting mechanoreceptors, we propose the Frame Guided Event Recurrent Force Network (FGER-Net). This IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS 

> Fig. 2. The architecture of the proposed FGER-Net is presented, alongside its conceptual underpinnings. The left portion illustrates the biological inspiration for the network: the synergistic function of fast and slow adapting mechanoreceptors in perceiving dynamic and static forces, respectively. These biological principles are emulated by the FGER-Net. In the network itself (center), event streams and image frames are synergistically fused for robust force estimation. In this architecture, frames are used to periodically correct for drift during training and to continuously stabilize the high frequency force predictions derived from the event stream during inference. The resulting force estimation is thereby made accurate and robust against drift, successfully capturing both dynamic and static tactile information, mirroring the perceptual capabilities shown on the right side of the diagram.

dual rate architecture mirrors biological perception: a high frequency recurrent pathway integrates transient force incre-ments from the event stream, while a low frequency pathway extracts absolute spatial references from single image frames for periodic training corrections. During inference, we maximize estimation stability via a continuous correction strategy. By persistently fusing the most recent frame feature with incoming events, this absolute spatial anchor effectively eliminates integration drift. The architecture utilizes dual parallel pathways optimized for each modality’s distinct characteristics. To circumvent the extreme sparsity typical of standard convolutions on event data, individual events are normalized and processed by a pointwise MLP, followed by max-pooling to generate an aggregated feature vector for each packet. Conversely, dense spatial information from image frames is extracted into a com-pact feature vector using a residual CNN backbone coupled with average pooling. 

a) Data Stream Segmentation: The algorithm’s process-ing cycle is driven by the arrival of new frames. A cycle is defined as the time interval between two consecutive frames, 

Ik−1 and Ik. All events occurring within this interval are segmented into a sequence of event packets Pm using a fixed time window ∆T . Therefore, the number of event packets, M, depending on the camera’s frame rate. 

Pm = {ek ∈ Estream | (m − 1)∆ T ≤ tk < m ∆T },

for m = 1 , . . . , M (3) where Pm is the m-th event packet. 

b) Guiding Frame Feature Extraction: First, a CNN is used, Φf (e.g. a part of ResNet), to extract a high-dimensional spatial feature vector fframe from the guide frame Iguide . This feature remains constant throughout the recurrent estimation process for one cycle. 

fframe = Φ f (Iguide ) ∈ RDf (4) where Df is the dimension of the frame feature. 

Algorithm 1 FGER-Net 

Input: Iguide , {Pm}Mm=1 , fprev cycle , (hprev cycle , C prev cycle )

Output: ˆffinal , (hM , C M )

Guiding Frame Feature Extraction 

fframe ← Φf (Iguide )

Recurrent Processing Loop 

ˆf0 ← fprev cycle ; (h0, C 0) ← (hprev cycle , C prev cycle )

for m ← 1 to M do 

fe,m ← Φe(Pm)

xm ← concatenate (fe,m , ˆfm−1)(hm, C m) ← LSTM (xm, (hm−1, C m−1)) ∆ ˆfm ← MLP ∆f (hm)ˆfm ← ˆfm−1 + ∆ ˆfm

end for 

Fusion and Correction 

ffusion ← concatenate ( ˆfM , fframe )∆fcorr ← MLP corr (ffusion )ˆffinal ← ˆfM + ∆ fcorr 

return ˆffinal , (hM , C M )

c) Recurrent Processing Loop: We initialize the scalar force estimate ˆf0 and the LSTM states (h0, C 0) as zeros. Sub-sequently, for each event packet Pm (where m = 1 , . . . , M ), the network executes the following recurrent updates: 1) Event Feature Extraction: A dedicated CNN branch, 

Φe, extracts a high-dimensional temporal feature vector 

fe,m from the current event packet Pm:

fe,m = Φ e(Pm) ∈ RDe (5) 2) Input Vector Construction: The extracted event feature 

fe,m is concatenated with the scalar force estimate from the previous step, ˆfm−1, forming the input vector xm for the LSTM module: 

xm = [ fe,m ; ˆfm−1] ∈ RDe+1 (6) IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS 

3) LSTM Update: The input vector xm and the previous hidden states (hm−1, C m−1) are fed into the LSTM cell to compute the updated states (hm, C m):

(hm, C m) = LSTM (xm, (hm−1, C m−1)) (7) 4) Force Increment Prediction: A Multi-Layer Perceptron, denoted as MLP ∆f , regresses the high-frequency normal force increment ∆ ˆfm for the current time window derived from the hidden state hm:

∆ ˆfm = MLP ∆f (hm) ∈ R (8) 5) Force Accumulation: The current normal force estimate is updated sequentially. This intermediate prediction re-lies purely on the integration of the fast-adapting event stream: ˆfm = ˆfm−1 + ∆ ˆfm (9) After iterating through all M packets within the cycle, an accumulated normal force estimate ˆfM , driven purely by the transient event stream, is obtained. 

d) Fusion Feature Construction: To counteract integra-tion drift, we concatenate the final accumulated event driven force, ˆfM , with the absolute spatial guide frame feature, fframe ,constructing a unified multimodal fusion vector, ffusion :

ffusion = [ ˆfM ; fframe ] ∈ R1+ Df (10) 

e) Correction Term Prediction: The fusion feature ffusion 

is processed by calibration network (MLP corr ) to predict a 1D force correction term, ∆fcorr . This component explicitly learns to compensate for accumulated drift by anchoring the estimate to the reliable absolute spatial deformation captured by the image frame: 

∆fcorr = MLP corr (ffusion ) ∈ R (11) 

f) Final Force Output: The corrective term is seamlessly added to the accumulated force to yield the final, drift com-pensated normal force estimate for the current temporal cycle, 

ˆffinal : ˆffinal = ˆfM + ∆ fcorr (12) This final prediction ˆffinal subsequently initializes ˆf0 for the ensuing processing cycle, thereby guaranteeing temporal continuity and robustness in long term force estimation. All experiments were trained for 50 epochs with a batch size of 128, utilizing the AdamW optimizer and a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4. During inference on an NVIDIA RTX 4090, our FGER-Net model achieves an latency of 0.87 ms, with a computational cost of 2.0 GFLOPs. The model comprises a total of 0.517 million parameters. 

IV. EXPERIMENT 

A. Sensing Vibrations 

1) Experimental Setup: A high frequency vibration experi-ment was designed to evaluate the vibration sensing capability of Mixtac. It was used to test whether the sensor can capture dynamic vibration signals for effective fast adapting input to the fusion network. Following Funk et al. [11] , a resonant speaker (Adin S9WiFi) is placed in direct contact with the silicone surface to maximize vibration energy transfer (Fig. 3(a)). Sinusoidal audio stimuli ranging from 50 to 250 Hz are applied. To process the data, raw asynchronous events are binned into 2 ms windows, generating a 500 Hz synchronous event rate signal. 

> Fig. 3. Experimental setup and results for high-frequency vibration sens-ing. (a) A resonant Bluetooth speaker (Adin S9WiFi) is placed directly on the Mixtac sensor to act as a vibration source. (b) Normalized frequency spectrum obtained from Mixtac’s raw event stream under various input tones. The spectrum was generated by applying a Fourier transform to the event count time series. The resulting prominent diagonal pattern indicates a strong linear correlation, confirming that the reconstructed frequency consistently matches the speaker’s input frequency up to the tested maximum of 250 Hz.

2) Result: The results confirm that Mixtac can reconstruct high frequency vibrations from its raw event stream. The reconstructed dominant frequency remains in close agreement with the speaker input frequency over 50 to 250 Hz in (Fig. 3(b)). This range is close to the Nyquist limit of the 500 Hz acquisition rate. 

B. Stability of Long Term Force Estimation 

1) Experimental Setup: This experiment examines whether the model remains stable during sustained contact. To reveal long term drift, the sensor was pressed for about 25 s with an 18 mm hemispherical 3D printed indenter while mounted on a 6 axis force sensor operating at 800 Hz. Stability was quantified by the MAE between the predicted and ground truth normal force ( Fz ). A 0.5 s sliding window was used to obtain rolling MAE and track error growth over time. Results from 10 trials were summarized in 5 s bins with violin plots. The dataset was split at the trajectory level with an 8:2 training validation ratio to prevent data leakage. 

2) Result: The long term stability of normal force estima-tion is characterized by time-binned violin plots of the rolling MAE aggregated over multiple trials (Fig. 4). The distributions remain stable across time, with median rolling MAE values for the five bins of 0.08N (0-5s), 0.07N (5-10s), 0.07N (10-15s), 0.07N (15-20s), and 0.06N (20-25s). 

C. Performance Comparison of Different Input Signals 

1) Experimental Setup: To demonstrate the essential syn-ergy between frame and event data, a comparative experiment was conducted. The primary objective was to quantify the performance improvement gained from this synergistic fusion by comparing the hybrid system against baselines that rely on only a single modality. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS   

> Fig. 4. Time-binned violin plot of rolling MAE for normal-force estimation demonstrates that the error distribution remains stable (and slightly decreases) over the trial duration. Rolling MAE is computed on Fzusing a 0.5 s sliding window. Each violin aggregates rolling MAE samples from ten trials, pooled within 5 s bins (0 to 5, 5 to 10, 10 to 15, 15 to 20, 20 to 25 s); the horizontal bar denotes the median within each bin.

For this comparison, three distinct model architectures were evaluated, each designed to isolate the different input signals: 1) Frames + Events Model : The complete FGER-Net as proposed in this paper. 2) Frames only Model : An ablated model was built without the event recurrent branch. The frame feature was fed directly into a regression head to isolate the contribution of spatial information. 3) Events only Model : An ablated model was built without the frame guided correction module. Its force estimation relies only on recurrent event integration to isolate the contribution of temporal dynamics without absolute cor-rection. AAll three models were trained under the same protocol and evaluated on dynamic force profiles. Performance was assessed by comparing predicted and ground truth force trajectories, with MAE and RMSE used as quantitative metrics for normal force estimation. 

2) Result: Three models were evaluated to compare input modalities: Frames only, Events only, and the proposed FGER-Net (Fig. 5, Table II). The Frames-only model provided a stable baseline but underrepresented high-frequency dynamics (MAE/RMSE: 0.06/0.08 N), whereas the Events-only model captured rapid oscillations, exhibited baseline drift, resulting in the largest error (0.12/0.14 N). The fused model achieved both high frequency tracking and baseline stability, yielding the best accuracy (0.04/0.05 N).                          

> TABLE II COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT INPUT SIGNALS FOR FORCE ESTIMATION
> Long Time Sampling Input Signals MAE RMSE Force Rate (N) (N) Estimation (Hz)
> Frames 0.06 0.08 ✓25 Events 0.12 0.14 ×500 Frames+Events 0.04 0.05 ✓500

D. Performance Comparison of Different Fusion Architec-tures 

1) Experimental Setup: To validate the effectiveness of our proposed architecture, a comparative experiment was con-ducted. This experiment was designed to demonstrate that the specific method of combining event and frame information is critical for achieving high performance, and that feature fusion strategy is insufficient for capturing high frequency dynamics. To this end, our proposed FGER-Net was directly compared against a common baseline fusion strategy, referred as the feature level deep fusion model. 1) Feature Level Deep Fusion Model (Baseline) : Op-erating in parallel, this model aggregates inter frame events into sparse frames, applying sparse convolutions exclusively to non zero pixels. Two independent CNN backbones extract features from both modalities, which are subsequently channel concatenated and regressed into force estimates via an MLP. 2) FGER-Net (Proposed) : Diverging from naive parallel concatenation, our architecture employs a sequential cor-rective mechanism: it continuously integrates high fre-quency force increments from the event stream while periodically correcting these accumulated estimates using absolute image frames. Both architectures were trained and evaluated on the same static force dataset. Performance was measured by MAE, RMSE, and R2 against the ground truth. The dataset contains 30 trials of 25 s each, generated by applying forces from 0 to 1 N with a 3D printed contactor. It was split into training and validation sets at an 8:2 ratio at the trajectory level to prevent data leakage from temporally correlated samples. 

2) Result: The experimental results show a difference in performance between the two models in estimating the normal force (Fig. 6). The proposed FGER-Net had lower error metrics than the baseline feature fusion model. FGER-Net’s MAE was 0.04 N and its RMSE was 0.05 N, compared to the feature fusion model’s MAE of 0.10 N and RMSE of 0.11 N. In terms of the R2 value, FGER-Net achieved 0.83, while the baseline model achieved 0.10. 

E. Tracking Hybrid Force Profile of Transient Impact and Static Hold 

1) Experimental Setup: To validate FGER-Net during dynamic-to-static transitions, a hybrid force profile was eval-uated using a controlled impact test. A calibrated 20 g cylin-drical metal weight was dropped from a fixed height of 5 cm onto the sensor center. Across 30 trials, the full contact sequence, including the initial impact, subsequent bounces, and final static hold, was synchronously recorded with 6-axis ground-truth force readings. To avoid data leakage, the dataset was split into training and validation sets at an 8:2 ratio at the trajectory level. 

2) Result: The results of this case study unequivocally demonstrate Mixtac’s unique ability to robustly handle com-plex force profiles by leveraging its hybrid sensing architec-ture. The normal force profile predicted by our model seam-lessly tracks the ground truth throughout both the transient impact and the ensuing static hold phases, indicating a flawless transition between the event driven and frame guided sensing regimes. details of the impact dynamics. These details include not only the primary impact peak but also the secondary peak IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS 24 26 28 30 32 34  

> Time [s]
> -0.8
> -0.7
> -0.6
> -0.5
> -0.4
> -0.3
> -0.2
> -0.1
> Force , Fz [N]

Interactive Force Analysis 

Fz, GT Fz, Frames + Events Fz, Frames Fz, Events 

Fig. 5. Results of different input signals. The predicted normal force is compared against the ground truth (blue) for three input modalities. The proposed frames+events model (green) accurately tracks high-frequency dynamics. In contrast, the frames only model (orange) misses fine details due to its low update rate, while the events only model (red) suffers from significant drift. The complementary nature of frames and events is thus demonstrated, validating that their fusion is essential for achieving both high frequency response and long term stability. 

Fig. 6. Performance comparison for normal force estimation between the proposed FGER-Net and a baseline feature level fusion model, evaluated on MAE, RMSE, and R2 metrics. The FGER-Net yields lower error metrics (MAE and RMSE) and a higher R2 than the feature level fusion model, indicating a closer fit to the ground truth data. 

resulting from a subsequent mechanical bounce. The predicted force curve, generated by the 20 g falling weight, accurately reproduces the actual physical force profile, achieving an MAE of 0.05 N and an RMSE of 0.07 N (Fig. 7). 

F. Closed loop Slip Control Experiment 

1) Experimental Setup: To evaluate the real time capability of Mixtac hardware, a closed loop slip control task was performed with a Franka Research 3 robotic arm. The end effector pressed diverse objects against a vertical wall at the critical force required to prevent slip. External disturbances from calibrated weights consistently induced slip without ac-

Fig. 7. Results for tracking a hybrid force profile. A 20 g cylindrical weight was dropped onto the sensor to generate a force signal with both transient impact and sustained static force. The plot compares the normal force predicted by FGER-Net (green) with the ground truth measurement (blue). The prediction remains consistent with the ground truth during both the impact and static hold phases (MAE = 0.05 N, RMSE = 0.07 N). This result supports the proposed fusion architecture, which combines event driven dynamic tracking with frame guided static estimation. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS             

> Fig. 8. Closed loop slip control experiment. (a) The test object, marked with a retroreflective target, is pressed against a wall. A laser tracker (Le-ica AT960; 1000 Hz, ±3μm) provides the ground truth slip displacement. A100 g weight is dropped from 5cm to introduce a sudden disturbance. (b) The weight is released above the object and falls freely. (c) Three keyframes from the experiment and the corresponding slip displacement curve. From slip onset to control completion, the process lasts 13 ms and produces a slip of 0.32 mm. (d) Sliding error across different test objects.

tive intervention, providing a baseline for evaluating algorithm sensitivity and responsiveness. The closed loop controller uses a proportional response driven by real time event density. Slip is detected when the 1 ms event count ( Nt) exceeds the background threshold ( Nth ). The arm then advances by ∆dt = k · (Nt − Nth ), increasing the normal force on the object. Furthermore, to evaluate the system’s robustness across distinct physical properties, three everyday objects (a ball, a deformable cup, and a box) were selected, representing a diverse range of materials, shapes, and weights. All dis-placement measurements were obtained using a high precision laser tracker, which provided ground truth data for object movement (Fig. 8(a)). For quantitative evaluation, the relative displacement of objects from their initial positions was measured to assess the precision of our perception system. 

2) Result: During the critical slip state, the box was im-pacted by a 100 g mass freely dropped from a height of 5 cm (Fig. 8(a)). Subsequently, sliding commenced, and within 13 ms of slip onset, the slip control algorithm was activated and successfully prevented further downward motion of the box (Fig. 8(b)). Beyond this representative box trial, control performance was further evaluated across objects with different physical properties. The box-trial keyframes and corresponding slip displacement curve are presented (Fig. 8(c)). The sliding errors across different test objects are summarized (Fig. 8(d)). Twenty trials were conducted for the rigid ball and deformable cup, and 15 for the box. The mean sliding displacement errors were 0.90 mm for the cup, 0.71 mm for the box, and 10.03 mm for the ball. The larger error for the ball is expected because its rigid spherical geometry reduces the contact area and available friction. Even so, the controller stabilized all objects in all trials, highlighting the ultra-low-latency event-driven reflex. 

V. DISCUSSION 

A. Analyzing Experimental Results 

This work addresses a central tradeoff in vision based tactile sensing. It also presents a dedicated hybrid tactile hardware prototype for this purpose. A single sensor should support both rapid dynamic perception and stable long term force estimation within the same contact episode. The discussion below revisits this tradeoff through the experiments. The high frequency vibration reconstruction experiment first clarifies why a hybrid design is necessary. Mixtac reconstructs vibrations up to 250 Hz from raw event counts. This result shows that the hardware can preserve rapid temporal changes. Such changes are important for dynamic tactile perception. However, temporal responsiveness alone is not enough. A tac-tile sensor for manipulation also remain reliable after contact becomes steady. This is the regime in which purely event driven sensing often begins to drift. The long duration static force estimation experiment ad-dresses this second requirement. Mixtac maintains static force estimation over 25 s. Robotic contact rarely ends at impact. Many tasks proceed from approach, to contact, and then to hold. A sensor that responds only to change cannot support this full sequence. In the proposed system, frame signals pro-vide an absolute spatial reference. This reference reduces the drift that often limits event only integration during prolonged contact. The ablation and baseline comparison experiments further clarify the source of improvement. The gain does not come from simply adding another input stream. Frames only estima-tion remains stable, but it misses rapid transients. Events only estimation responds quickly, but its estimates drift over time. Naive feature fusion is also insufficient. Dense frame features can dominate training. As a result, they can suppress the temporal contribution of events. For this reason, the structured design of FGER-Net is as important as the hybrid hardware itself. The architecture allows each modality to contribute where it is most informative. It does not force an unbalanced compromise. The hybrid force profile experiment provides the clearest evidence for this transition. The sequence begins with atransient impact and ends with a static hold. In the early stage, the event stream captures the rapid force variation, including the impact peak and the rebound. Once the contact settles, the frame stream becomes more important and maintains a stable estimate. The two modalities therefore support different phases of the same tactile process. This result supports the bio inspired motivation introduced earlier. The closed loop slip control experiment further reveals the capability of the hardware for low latency tactile sensing. The focus here is early signal availability under rapid disturbance. The 13 ms reaction latency shows that the event pathway can detect slip related changes before large failure develops. This result supports the potential of the hardware for low latency tactile feedback. It also supports the broader argument of the paper. Dynamic responsiveness and steady estimation belong to the same sensing requirement in robotic interaction. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS 

TABLE III COMPARISON OF TYPICAL VISION BASED TACTILE SENSORS                               

> Sampling Normal Normal Sensor Input Rate Force Error Force Range Signal (Hz) (N) (N)
> Insight [25] Frames 40 0.03 2ViTacTip [26] Frames 30 0.04 ∼1E-BTS [12] Events 500 0.49 8Gelevent [13] Events 180 0.80 16
> Mixtac (ours) Frames+Events 500 0.04 1

Taken together, these experiments address the challenge posed in the Introduction. Mixtac relaxes the classical tradeoff through cooperation between frame and event sensing. The system achieves both high frequency tracking and stable long term estimation. This result establishes a practical path toward vision based tactile sensing that is both responsive and stable. It also indicates potential for robotic manipulation tasks that require fast response and sustained contact estimation. 

B. Signal Considerations 

The performance of the Mixtac sensor was benchmarked against other vision based tactile sensors, with the results sum-marized in Table III. Our findings show that Mixtac achieves a normal force range and error level comparable to mainstream vision based tactile sensors. Furthermore, compared to purely event-based approaches like [12], which rely on active high frequency illumination to artificially induce events for static perception, Mixtac leverages the synergistic nature of frames. This allows for stable long term estimation while preserving the intrinsic sparsity and bandwidth efficiency of event data, avoiding the high data redundancy caused by flickering light sources. 

C. Limitations and Future Work 

Despite performance, Mixtac remains constrained by de-ployability and synchronization. Its current form factor, dom-inated by the DAVIS346, limits integration into grippers and dexterous hands, although fingertip-scale event cameras (e.g., PX EVB Gen2 and Speck) provide a clear miniaturization path. In addition, residual latency between force ground truth and event streams still bottlenecks estimation accuracy, moti-vating a custom PCB for hardware time synchronization. Future work will focus on the following key areas. The first will be to address the hysteresis effect and low intrinsic frequency of silicone in order to restore high frequency vibra-tion signals for real time texture recognition. Moreover, one promising avenue for future research lies in integrating our tactile perception system with visual modalities to facilitate multimodal dataset construction. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

This paper introduced Mixtac, a novel hybrid tactile sensor designed to resolve the fundamental tradeoff between high frequency dynamic sensing and long term estimation stability. FGER-Net was developed to synergistically fuse the two data streams. In this architecture, frames are used to periodically correct for drift during training and to continuously stabilize the high frequency force predictions derived from the event stream during inference. Our experiments validate this ap-proach, demonstrating a low MAE of 0.04 N and significant performance gains over single modality methods. By achieving both high fidelity dynamic force tracking and stable force estimation over extended periods, this work paves the way for more complex and robust robotic manipulation in unstructured environments. 

REFERENCES 

[1] Y. Liu, X. Xu, W. Chen, H. Yuan, H. Wang, J. Xu, R. Chen, and L. Yi, “Enhancing generalizable 6d pose tracking of an in-hand object with tactile sensing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1106–1113, 2023. [2] F. R. Hogan, J. Ballester, S. Dong, and A. Rodriguez, “Tactile dexterity: Manipulation primitives with tactile feedback,” in 2020 IEEE interna-tional conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pp. 8863–8869. IEEE, 2020. [3] H. Yousef, M. Boukallel, and K. Althoefer, “Tactile sensing for dexter-ous in-hand manipulation in robotics—a review,” Sensors and Actuators A: physical , vol. 167, no. 2, pp. 171–187, 2011. [4] S. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Gao, W. Wan, J. Shan, H. Xue, F. Sun, Y. Yang, and B. Fang, “Hardware Technology of Vision-Based Tactile Sensor: A Review,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 22, DOI 10.1109/JSEN.2022.3210210, no. 22, pp. 21 410–21 427, Nov. 2022. [5] S. Luo, J. Bimbo, R. Dahiya, and H. Liu, “Robotic tactile perception of object properties: A review,” Mechatronics , vol. 48, pp. 54–67, 2017. [6] A. Dwivedi, A. Ramakrishnan, A. Reddy, K. Patel, S. Ozel, and C. D. Onal, “Design, modeling, and validation of a soft magnetic 3-d force sensor,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 3852–3863, 2018. [7] M. I. Tiwana, S. J. Redmond, and N. H. Lovell, “A review of tactile sensing technologies with applications in biomedical engineering,” Sen-sors and Actuators A: physical , vol. 179, pp. 17–31, 2012. [8] J. M. Romano, K. Hsiao, G. Niemeyer, S. Chitta, and K. J. Kuchen-becker, “Human-inspired robotic grasp control with tactile sensing,” 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1067–1079, 2011. [9] F. B. Naeini, A. M. AlAli, R. Al-Husari, A. Rigi, M. K. Al-Sharman, D. Makris, and Y. Zweiri, “A novel dynamic-vision-based approach for tactile sensing applications,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 1881–1893, 2019. [10] L. Miyashita and M. Ishikawa, “Portable high-speed optical gaze con-troller with vision chip,” Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1133–1140, 2022. [11] N. Funk, E. Helmut, G. Chalvatzaki, R. Calandra, and J. Peters, “Evetac: An event-based optical tactile sensor for robotic manipulation,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2024. [12] D. Mukashev, S. Seitzhan, J. Chumakov, S. Khajikhanov, M. Yergibay, N. Zhaniyar, R. Chibar, A. Mazhitov, M. Rubagotti, and Z. Kap-passov, “E-BTS: Event-Based Tactile Sensor for Haptic Teleoperation in Augmented Reality,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 41, DOI 10.1109/TRO.2024.3502215, pp. 450–463, 2025. [13] D. Yin, S. Lu, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, Z. Dai, D. Nan, B. Cai, S. He, and X. Chen, “Gelevent—a novel high-speed tactile sensor with event cam-era,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , 2025. [14] B. He, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Chen, C. D. Singh, H. Li, Y. Gao, S. Shen, K. Wang, Y. Cao et al. , “Microsaccade-inspired event camera for robotics,” Science Robotics , vol. 9, no. 90, p. eadj8124, 2024. [15] F. Baghaei Naeini, “Neuromorphic vision-based tactile sensor for robotic grasp,” Ph.D. dissertation, Kingston University, 2020. [16] A. Wasti, Spatiotemporal Alignment of Event Stream with Images and Active Illumination . Rochester Institute of Technology, 2024. [17] L. Chen, D. Li, X. Wang, P. Shao, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Tian, and J. Tang, “Retain, blend, and exchange: A quality-aware spatial-stereo fusion approach for event stream recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18845 , 2024. [18] B. Ward-Cherrier, N. Pestell, L. Cramphorn, B. Winstone, M. E. Gian-naccini, J. Rossiter, and N. F. Lepora, “The tactip family: Soft optical tactile sensors with 3d-printed biomimetic morphologies,” Soft robotics ,vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 216–227, 2018. [19] S. Cui, R. Wang, J. Hu, J. Wei, S. Wang, and Z. Lou, “In-hand object localization using a novel high-resolution visuotactile sensor,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 69, DOI 10.1109/TIE.2021.3090697, no. 6, pp. 6015–6025, 2022. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS 

[20] T. Nozaki and H. I. Krebs, “Development of an optical sensor capable of measuring distance, tilt, and contact force,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 69, DOI 10.1109/TIE.2021.3084168, no. 5, pp. 4938–4945, 2022. [21] C. Zhang, S. Cui, S. Wang, J. Hu, Y. Cai, R. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Gel-stereo 2.0: An improved gelstereo sensor with multimedium refractive stereo calibration,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 71, DOI 10.1109/TIE.2023.3312418, no. 7, pp. 7452–7462, 2024. [22] L. Mo, Y. Li, S. Fu, J. Xia, Y.-F. Zhang, Y. Zhong, X. Chen, and J. G. Chase, “A highly sensitive, compact, and low-cost soft triaxial optical force (stof) sensor for robotic grasping and human–machine interaction,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 73, DOI 10.1109/TIE.2025.3603085, no. 1, pp. 1469–1480, 2026. [23] C. Lin, H. Zhang, J. Xu, L. Wu, and H. Xu, “9dtact: A compact vision-based tactile sensor for accurate 3d shape reconstruction and generalizable 6d force estimation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 923–930, 2023. [24] G. Taverni, D. P. Moeys, C. Li, C. Cavaco, V. Motsnyi, D. S. S. Bello, and T. Delbruck, “Front and back illuminated dynamic and active pixel vision sensors comparison,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs , vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 677–681, 2018. [25] H. Sun, K. J. Kuchenbecker, and G. Martius, “A soft thumb-sized vision-based sensor with accurate all-round force perception,” Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 135–145, 2022. [26] D. Zhang, W. Fan, J. Lin, H. Li, Q. Cong, W. Liu, N. F. Lepora, and S. Luo, “Design and benchmarking of a multi-modality sensor 

Yihang Li received the B.E. degree in robotics engineering from Harbin Engineering University, in 2025, China. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University, China. His research interests include tactile sensors, intelligent sensing, and robotics. 

Yijin Chen is with the Robotics Engineering program at the Guohao Academy of Future Technology, Tongji University. She serves as a Research Assistant at the State Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems. Her research interests include robotics system design, intelligent control, and human-robot in-teraction. 

Junkai Xu received the B.S. degree from Nan-chang University, China, in 2011, and the M.S. degree from Shandong University, China, in 2014. From 2014 to 2020, he studied as aPh.D. candidate at Shanghai Jiao Tong Uni-versity, China. He is with IMU Master Technol-ogy Co., Ltd, Shanghai 200240, China, focusing on embedded system development, hardware-software co-debugging, and performance opti-mization. 

for robotic manipulation with gan-based cross-modality interpretation,” 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2025. 

Na Ningguta received the B.E. degree from Northeast Forestry University, China. He is cur-rently an Embedded Software Engineer with Shanghai Guanshi Technology Co., Ltd, fo-cusing on embedded system development, hardware-software co-debugging, and perfor-mance optimization. 

Peter B. Shull (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering and com-puter engineering from LeTourneau University, Longview, TX, USA, in 2005, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2008 and 2012, respectively. From 2012 to 2013, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Bioengineer-ing Department, Stanford University. He is currently a Professor of Mechanical En-gineering with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. He has conducted pioneering research in human-computer interaction, hand gesture recognition, wearable systems. 

Shuo Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in mechatronic engineering from Zhe-jiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2015, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2020. From 2019 to 2020, he was a Visiting Scholar with Imperial College London, London, U.K. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Control Science and Engi-neering, College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai. His research interests include human machine interaction, intelligent sensing, and robotics. 

Bin He (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in engineering machinery from Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical and electronic control engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2001. From 2001 and 2003, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the State Key Laboratory of Fluid Power Transmission and Control, Zhejiang University. He is currently a Professor with the Depart-ment of Control Science and Engineering, Col-lege of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. His current research interests include intelligent robot control, biomimetic microrobots, and wireless networks.