1
Adaptive Vision-Language Grasping via Composable
Foundation Priors and Generalizable Grasp Synthesis
Sixu Yan , Student Member, IEEE, Shikang Wang , Binhua Huang , Xuanlai Tang , Guohua Fan , Fan Huang ,
Haoxuan Li , Yongkang Li , Yuhan Li , Bencheng Liao , Zeyu Zhang , Member, IEEE, Wenyu Liu , Senior
Member, IEEE, Hangxin Liu , Member, IEEE, and Xinggang Wang , Senior Member, IEEE
Task Instruction
(a)
motion
direction
"Grasp the mug to <action>"
Observation
Spatial Challenge
target object obstacles
Cognitive Challenge
cluttered scene
Temporal Challenge
functional
part
functional
grasp type
...
Contextual Conditions
vision / language / motion / embodiment / ...
spatial 
prior
cognitive
prior
temporal
prior
Composable Foundation Priors
task-adaptive grasping
End-to-End
VLG Policy
Multimodal
Training Data
task-specific grasping
...
large-scale data demand
low context adaptability
low data dependency
high context adaptability
(b)
(c)
perception
reasoning
planning
...
structured
grasp interface
...
Base Grasp Policy
...
Fig. 1: Adaptive vision-language grasping. (a) Real-world grasping occurs under diverse contextual conditions and task-
dependent factors, each of which can substantially alter the desired grasp strategy. (b) End-to-end VLG policies typically entangle
these factors within a single network trained on large-scale multimodal data, which limits their adaptability to unseen task
contexts. In contrast, (c) AdaRoboVLG decouples task-dependent understanding from physical grasp synthesis: foundation-model
priors construct a structured grasp interface, from which a generalizable base policy synthesizes executable grasp poses.
Abstract—This paper proposes AdaRoboVLG, a task-adaptive
Vision-Language-Grasp (VLG) framework that supports gener-
alizable grasp synthesis across different robotic hands. Unlike
existing VLG methods that tightly couple foundation models
with end-to-end grasp policies, AdaRoboVLG learns an efficient
generalizable base policy that generates and evaluates physically
feasible grasp candidates through explicit kinematic mapping
and force-closure-based stability estimation, while offloading task-
dependent understanding to specialized foundation-model modules.
These modules provide composable priors that are integrated
into the grasp synthesis process, enabling contextually adaptive
grasp synthesis without retraining the underlying grasp policy.
Through extensive simulation and real-world experiments, we
demonstrate that (i) the base policy exhibits efficient learning and
strong cross-hand generalization, (ii) the framework effectively in-
Sixu Yan and Shikang Wang contributed equally to this work. (Correspond-
ing authors: Xinggang Wang and Hangxin Liu.)
Sixu Yan, Shikang Wang, Binhua Huang, Haoxuan Li, Yongkang Li, Yuhan
Li, Wenyu Liu, and Xinggang Wang are with the School of Electronic Infor-
mation and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: {yansixu, shikangwang, binhuahuang, lihaoxuan,
liyk, yuhanli, liuwy, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn).
Xuanlai Tang is with KEENON Robotics Co., Ltd., Shanghai 201206, China
(e-mail: tangxl@keenon.com).
Guohua Fan is with Suzhou Silicon Era Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd.,
Suzhou 215131, China (e-mail: m201272049@alumni.hust.edu.cn).
Fan Huang is with Suzhou Zhichuang Xinwei Technology Co., Ltd., Suzhou
215123, China, and also with the College of Materials, Xiamen University,
Xiamen 361005, China (e-mail: phy.huangfan@gmail.com).
Bencheng Liao is with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and
also with ByteDance, Beijing 100098, China (e-mail: bcliao@hust.edu.cn).
Zeyu Zhang is with the State Key Laboratory of General Artificial
Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI),
Beijing 100080, China (e-mail: zhangzeyu@bigai.ai).
Sixu Yan is also with Hubei Automation Institute, Wuhan 430071, China.
Hangxin Liu is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China (e-mail: hx.liu@pku.edu.cn).
corporates spatial, cognitive, and temporal priors to address three
representative grasping challenges without compromising grasp
synthesis performance compared to state-of-the-art methods, and
(iii) these priors can operate jointly to enable functional grasping
in cluttered and dynamic environments. These results indicate
that decoupling physical grasp synthesis from task-dependent
understanding provides a scalable paradigm for robotic grasping,
allowing future advances in foundation models to be directly
translated into improved grasp capabilities without redesigning
or retraining the underlying grasp policy. Supplementary videos
are available at https://adarobovlg.github.io/.
Index Terms—Adaptive vision-language grasping, Generalizable
grasp synthesis, Foundation models for embodied AI
I. INTRODUCTION
G
RASPING is one of the most fundamental skills required
by robots for physical interaction [1]. Despite substantial
progress, the grasp generation problem remains challenging
due to the difficulty in robustly selecting a grasp among almost
infinite possible configurations between an end-effector and
an object. More importantly, a grasp is inherently contextual.
The same object may require entirely different grasp strategies
depending on its surroundings, task objectives, and interac-
tion dynamics. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, executing the task
instruction “Grasp the mug to ⟨action⟩” oftentimes involves
such intertwined factors. The target object may be partially
occluded or covered by clutter, restricting feasible approach
directions and grasp configurations. The grasp itself must satisfy
functional requirements associated with subsequent object use:
pour water or hand it over. And continuous adjustment is
required for a successful grasp when the object or robot is
moving. These spatial, cognitive, and temporal challenges
arXiv:2609.04096v1  [cs.RO]  3 Sep 2026


2
frequently arise simultaneously, making robust and adaptive
grasping particularly difficult.
Humans, in contrast, can effortlessly adapt their grasping
behaviors to such combined challenges in varying situations.
A key reason is that humans exploit rich priors accumulated
from commonsense knowledge [2] and past experience [3] to
guide perception [4], reasoning, and motor coordination [5].
Such priors enable efficient selection and adaptation of grasp
strategies without requiring exhaustive experience for every
possible situation.
Analogous to the role of prior knowledge in human intelli-
gence, foundation models have shown strong capabilities to pro-
vide informative priors for visual recognition and tracking [6],
[7], spatial understanding [8], [9], embodied reasoning [10],
[11], and robot control [12], [13]. In particular, their powerful
visual recognition and language understanding capabilities have
fueled the emergence of VLG models [14], [15], [16], [17], [18],
which exhibit strong generalization capabilities and support
natural interactions by tightly integrating perception and grasp
execution. However, existing VLG methods predominantly
incorporate foundation models within an end-to-end framework
that directly maps visual observations and language instructions
to grasp poses (see Fig. 1b). Although effective, the perfor-
mance of such specialized policies is largely constrained by
the coverage of training data, model scale, and computational
resources [14], [16], [18]. As a result, scaling these policies to
cover the vast diversity of grasp configurations, task intents,
and environmental dynamics encountered in the real world
remains impractical [19].
Taking a different perspective, we propose AdaRoboVLG, an
adaptive vision-language grasping framework (see Fig. 1c) that
decouples task-dependent understanding from physical grasp
synthesis. Specifically, we design a structured grasp interface
consisting of object geometry, Contact Grasp Representations
(CGRs) [20], and grasp types. A CGR encodes a local contact
primitive on the object surface, including the contact location,
approach direction, closing direction, and grasp width. The
grasp types follow the human grasp taxonomy [21] and are
kinematically compatible with the target robotic hand. Centered
on this structured grasp interface, we first learn an efficient
base policy that converts the interface into hand-specific grasp
candidates and selects the most stable candidate using a learned
decision model that evaluates force-closure conditions [22].
Throughout this process, complementary foundation-model
priors for spatial understanding, cognitive reasoning, and
temporal tracking construct or update the structured grasp
interface, allowing the base policy to synthesize grasps that
are both task-consistent and physically executable.
Fig. 2 illustrates three representative examples. (i) By
lifting DINOv3 [7] features extracted from multi-view RGB-D
observations into 3D space, the spatial prior predicts global
CGRs, providing spatially feasible contact constraints for
grasp synthesis in cluttered scenes. (ii) By combining an
Large Language Model (LLM) augmented with Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG) [23] over a grasp-examples
database with structured Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [24] reason-
ing, and SAM3 [25]-based visual grounding, the cognitive prior
localizes the target object, refines the CGRs, and infers appro-
priate grasp types for functional grasp generation according
to language instructions. (iii) By combining the mask-tracking
capability of SAM3 with the cross-frame feature consistency
of DINOv3, the temporal prior estimates the motion of target
geometry and CGRs online, enabling grasps to be continuously
updated for dynamic objects. More importantly, these spatial,
cognitive, and temporal priors modify the same structured grasp
interface, allowing them to operate independently or jointly
while enabling contextually adaptive grasp generation across a
wide range of scenarios.
In simulation experiments, we first validate that the base
policy is effective and generalizable, which not only exhibits
efficient learning but also facilitates cross-hand deployment.
Building on this base policy, we further evaluate the contextual
adaptation of AdaRoboVLG enabled by three types of example
foundation priors. For clutter-aware grasping, the spatial
prior enables AdaRoboVLG to achieve an average success
rate of 88.4% across three robotic hands and three clutter
levels on the DexGraspNet 2.0 [26] benchmark, achieving
state-of-the-art results on the random and loose splits. For
functional grasping, we evaluate the cognitive prior through two
complementary experiments. In grasp functionality inference, it
achieves functional-part and grasp-type accuracies of 94.0% and
87.0% on an open-set benchmark. In language-guided target
grasping, AdaRoboVLG achieves the best average success rates
of 81.3% and 86.0% on simulation benchmarks built from
GraspClutter6D [27] and GraspNet-1Billion [28], respectively.
Finally, for dynamic grasping, evaluations on GraspNet-1Billion
show that the temporal prior enables perfect tracking association
accuracy, the lowest translation errors, and competitive rotation
errors compared to existing grasp-tracking methods.
In real-world settings, we further validate that the spatial,
cognitive, and temporal priors can be jointly integrated to ad-
dress more challenging grasping tasks. For functional grasping
in cluttered scenes, AdaRoboVLG achieves an overall success
rate of 83.3% over 510 trials across 102 everyday objects from
six categories. On a moving conveyor belt, AdaRoboVLG
enables functional grasping in dynamic cluttered scenes, while
performing online grasp updates at 5 Hz. We also evaluate
the tracking robustness of AdaRoboVLG under four types
of human-induced disturbances, where it achieves an average
success rate of 89.7%.
The broader implications of this work extend beyond grasp-
ing performance itself. Decoupling physical grasp synthesis
from task-dependent understanding not only improves data
and training efficiency, but also establishes a stable interface
through which increasingly capable foundation models can be
integrated over time. Rather than repeatedly retraining end-to-
end policies, future advances in perception and reasoning can
be directly translated into improved grasping capabilities by
updating only the corresponding foundation-prior modules.
A. Contributions
Our contributions are threefold:
1) We propose AdaRoboVLG, an adaptive VLG framework
that decouples task-dependent understanding from physical
grasp synthesis and bridges them through a structured


3
Spatial Understanding
Scene Semantics
Construction
Scene-level CGRs
Prediction
Cognitive Reasoning
Grasp 
Functionality
Inference
Grasping
Examples
Object Semantic
Refinement
Functional CGRs
Alignment
Grasp
Types
Object Geometry
Object Semantics
Functional CGRs
Scene-level
Representations
Structured Grasp Interface
Scene
CGRs
Scene 
Semantics
Scene 
Geometry
DINOv3
Contact-GraspNet
Seed-1.8
Seed-1.8 SAM3
Seed-1.8 SAM3
RAG
CoT
Grasp Interface Updates
Grasp Interface Construction
Temporal Tracking
Segmented Mask Tracking
...
③
④
⑤
Semantic Field Construction
...
Object
Tracking
SAM3
Semantics
Construction
DINOv3
Transformation Estimation
Feature Matching
Gradient Optimization
Inspire
(Prismatic 3 Finger) 
Allegro
(Large Diameter)
Base Grasp Policy
...
Hand-specific Grasp Mapping
Hand-agnostic Grasp Evaluation
HOI Representation
0
1
Grasp Stability Score
Consistent Grasp Updates
⑥
RGB Images
Depth Images
Multi-View Observations
"Grasp the mug to
pour water"
Task Instruction
Camera
Parameters
Foundation Priors
Grasp Experts
stable grasp pose
Hand Specification
...
①
②
Task Contexts
Composable Foundation Priors for Task Understanding and Interface Construction
Grasp Synthesis and Updating
Fig. 2: Overview of AdaRoboVLG. To enable adaptive vision-language grasping, our framework explicitly decouples task-driven
understanding from physical grasp synthesis. By integrating spatial, cognitive, and temporal priors, it constructs a structured
grasp interface that directly guides an efficient base grasp policy to generate stable and executable grasp poses.
grasp interface. It enables task adaptation, cross-hand
grasp synthesis, and framework extensibility.
2) We develop an efficient base policy for generalizable grasp
synthesis. It consists of an explicit kinematic mapping and
a learned decision model that employs the proposed hand-
object interaction (HOI) representation to encode local
contact geometry relevant to force closure, supporting
shared grasp stability evaluation across robotic hands.
3) We introduce composable spatial, cognitive, and temporal
prior modules that construct and update the structured
grasp interface for task-adaptive grasping under diverse
and combined contextual conditions, such as cluttered
scenes, functional requirements, and dynamic interactions.
B. Overview
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec. II
reviews the literature and compares existing research. Sec. III
formulates adaptive vision-language grasping and defines the
structured grasp interface. Building on this interface, Sec. IV
develops the base policy for generalizable grasp synthesis,
and Sec. V introduces the three composable foundation-prior
modules for task-adaptive grasping under diverse contextual
conditions. Sec. VI and Sec. VII demonstrate the efficacy of
AdaRoboVLG through simulation and real-world experiments,
respectively. Finally, Sec. VIII concludes the paper with a
discussion of limitations and future directions.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Vision-Language-Conditioned Robotic Grasping
Vision-language grasping enables robots to perform precise
grasps based on human instructions. To address the challenges
illustrated in Fig. 1a, recent works have advanced this direction
by leveraging LLMs and Vision Language Models (VLMs) to
(i) provide task-relevant guidance for grasp policies, such as
semantic cues [29], [30], object affordances [31], [32], and spa-
tial priors [33], [34]; (ii) perform high-level task planning [35],
[36] and functional reasoning [37], [38]; and (iii) develop end-
to-end Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [14], [15], [16],
[18], trained on large-scale robotic datasets, to directly generate
feasible grasp poses [16], [18] or continuous actions [14], [15].
However, these methods are often task- and hand-specific,
requiring additional data collection and policy training when
adapting to new tasks or embodiments. AdaRoboVLG ad-
dresses this limitation by decoupling task understanding from
grasp synthesis through diverse foundation priors. New task
requirements can be accommodated by updating the relevant
priors, while new embodiments are supported by reusing the
shared grasp policy, without modifying the entire framework.
B. Learning-Based Multi-Finger Grasp Pose Synthesis
Learning-based multi-finger grasp synthesis can be broadly
categorized into four representative paradigms. Specifically,
hand-centric methods directly map perceptual observations to


4
grasp actions [39], [40], [41], [42], [43], enabling efficient infer-
ence but remaining constrained to specific hand embodiments.
Object-centric methods improve cross-hand generalization
using contact maps [44], [45] or contact points [46], [47], but
often require costly nonconvex optimization [48]. Interaction-
centric methods further balance generalization and efficiency
by explicitly modeling hand-object relationships [49], [50],
[51]. However, these paradigms primarily focus on object-level
grasp synthesis. More recently, scene-centric methods have
extended grasp synthesis to cluttered environments [26], [52],
[53], but their grasp generation and decision processes are
typically coupled with specific hand embodiments.
Drawing from these efforts, AdaRoboVLG decomposes grasp
synthesis into two stages, with each stage built upon a hand-
agnostic representation. During grasp generation, CGRs, which
encode fundamental contact primitives, are converted into
executable hand-specific grasp candidates through an explicit
mapping function. During grasp decision, these candidates are
encoded using the proposed HOI representation and evaluated
by a hand-agnostic decision model. This design retains efficient
inference while supporting cross-hand grasp synthesis and
extending naturally to complex multi-object scenes.
C. Foundation Models in Embodied Intelligence
Foundation models [54], with their powerful capabilities in
perception [7], [55] and reasoning [56], [57], are becoming
a vital cornerstone for general-purpose intelligent systems.
They are widely used for high-level planning [10], [11] and
low-level control [12], [13] in robotics. Current applications
can be broadly categorized into three types: (i) zero-shot
utilization, where foundation priors are directly used for
embodied navigation [58], [59] and manipulation [60], [61]
without additional training; (ii) task-specific adaptation, where
foundation models are adapted to robotic tasks through efficient
finetuning [62], [63]; and (iii) integration into action policies,
where foundation models are embedded into closed-loop
perception-action pipelines, and some works further explore
building policy foundation models [13], [64] trained on large-
scale robotic datasets.
Inspired by prior work, AdaRoboVLG leverages and com-
poses diverse foundation models to enable adaptive robotic
grasping. Specifically, DINOv3 [7] and SAM3 [25] are directly
employed in a zero-shot manner for semantic understanding,
target segmentation, and temporal tracking. Meanwhile, the
LLM is augmented with grasp-relevant taxonomy knowledge
to facilitate grasp functionality inference. The resulting spatial,
cognitive, and temporal constraints are then unified into a
structured grasp interface to guide physical grasp synthesis.
By composing diverse foundation priors, AdaRoboVLG can
flexibly adapt to novel task contexts and grasping requirements.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION AND GRASP INTERFACE
This section presents our formulation for adaptive vision-
language grasping. We first introduce the essential notation
and preliminaries in Sec. III-A and then define the problem
and structured grasp interface in Sec. III-B.
Franka (2F)
Robotiq (2F)
DH3 (3F)
Inspire (4F)
Allegro (5F)
Adduction
Grip
Writing
Tripod
Tripod
Lateral
Prismatic 2
Finger
(a)
(b)
contact point
grasp width
baseline vector
approach vector
principal closing frame
& antipodal grasp pose
Tip Pinch /
Ring
Prismatic 2
Finger
Tripod
Sphere 3
Finger
Distal
Type
Fig. 3: Contact grasp representation. This representation
effectively captures a hand-agnostic contact primitive that can
be (a) shared across diverse end-effectors, ranging from parallel
grippers to multi-finger robotic hands, and (b) adaptable to
various functional grasp types.
A. Notation and Preliminaries
Before delving into the formulation of AdaRoboVLG, we
start by defining the following mathematical notation:
• Bold lowercase letters represent vectors (e.g., g), with the
subscript i denoting the i-th entry of the vector (e.g., gi).
• Bold uppercase letters represent matrices (e.g., T ). The
identity matrix of dimension n is denoted by In×n. The
superscript ·
T indicates the transpose.
• Calligraphic font letters are used to denote sets (e.g., G). The
notation |·| denotes the number of elements in a set.
B. Problem Formulation and Structured Grasp Interface
A multi-finger grasp pose g is formally defined as:
g = (T , q) , T =

R
t
0
0
0
1

,
(1)
where T ∈SE(3) denotes the hand base pose in the world
frame, comprising a rotation matrix R ∈R3×3 and a translation
vector t ∈R3. q ∈Rn characterizes the joint configuration of
an n-degree-of-freedom (DoF) multi-finger robotic hand. The
goal of adaptive vision-language grasping is to synthesize a
set of executable grasp poses G = {gi}|G|
i=1 that are compatible
with hand embodiment H and satisfy the task context C.
Instead of learning an end-to-end network that maps the task
context to grasp poses, we decompose adaptive vision-language
grasping into task-dependent understanding and physical grasp
synthesis, and bridge them through a structured grasp interface.
Under this formulation, the task context C is first converted


5
Grasp Synthesis Methods (Optional) 
Model-based Methods
Heuristic
Analytical
Search
Optimization
...
Learning-based Methods
PPO
SAC
CVAE
Diffusion ...
...
baseline
vector
approach
vector
grasp width
base frame
contact point
Grasp Type
Hand Specification
Object Geometry
&
(Functional) CGRs
Mapping
Input
Hand-specific Grasp Mapping
Post-processing & Optimization 
Explicit Grasp Mapping
principal closing frame
world frame
...
grasp the handle of the mug
grasp the body of the mug
grasp the handle of the mug
DH3 (Type1)
Inspire (Prismatic 3 Finger)
Allegro (Large Diameter)
pre-defined
Fig. 4: Hand-specific grasp mapping. This function maps
the object geometry, CGRs, and grasp type into taxonomy-
consistent grasp poses for a specific robotic hand.
into a structured grasp interface I. Subsequently, executable
grasp poses G∗are synthesized from this interface:
fτ : C →I, fπ : I × H →G∗.
(2)
Formally, we define this interface as
I = (O, A, TH) ,
(3)
where O denotes the object geometry, A = {aj}|A|
j=1 denotes
the set of CGRs that characterize the fundamental contact
primitives for stable grasping, and TH = {τk}|TH|
k=1 represents
the set of grasp types that follow the human grasp taxonomy
and are kinematically compatible with the hand embodiment H.
Here, fπ(·) denotes the base grasp policy, which synthesizes
executable grasp poses from the structured interface I and the
hand embodiment H. fτ(·) denotes the transformation from
task context C to the interface I, which can be instantiated
with diverse composable foundation priors.
IV. BASE GRASP POLICY
This section presents the implementation details of the base
grasp policy fπ(·). We sequentially describe the policy design
principle (Sec. IV-A), the CGR definition (Sec. IV-B), the hand-
specific grasp mapping (Sec. IV-C), the HOI representation
(Sec. IV-D), and the hand-agnostic grasp evaluation (Sec. IV-E).
A. Design Principle
Given the grasp interface I defined in Eq. (3), the base policy
converts it into executable grasp poses for a target robotic hand.
To support efficient and cross-hand grasp synthesis, the policy
adopts a two-stage process consisting of hand-specific grasp
mapping and hand-agnostic grasp evaluation.
For grasp mapping, the interface I is mapped to candidate
grasp poses for a specific robotic hand H. Specifically, a
hand-specific mapping function MH(·) takes the target object
geometry O, a CGR descriptor aj, and a grasp type τk as
input, and generates the target grasp poses Gj,k:
Gj,k = MH (O, aj, τk) ,
(4)
where Gj,k = {g(i)
j,k}|Gj,k|
i=1
is the set of grasp pose candidates.
The complete set of grasp candidates for aj is computed by
aggregating candidates across all such grasp types:
Gj =
|TH|
[
k=1
Gj,k =
[
τk∈TH
MH(O, aj, τk).
(5)
Subsequently, we estimate the quality of each grasp candidate.
We first extract the HOI representation RHOI from the hand-
object contact interface relevant to force closure [22]. This
process is achieved by an extractor E(·), which takes the object
geometry O, the hand specification H, and a grasp pose g(i)
j,k
as input, and produces the HOI representation RHOI:
RHOI = E

O, H, g(i)
j,k

.
(6)
Then, a hand-agnostic grasp decision model D(·) is introduced
to predict the grasp success probability β, conditioned on the
HOI representation RHOI:
β = D(RHOI).
(7)
The objective of the base policy is to find a set of top-K
grasp poses G∗that maximizes the predicted success rate:
G∗=
arg max
G⊂S
j Gj,|G|=K
Eg(i)
j,k

D

E(O, H, g(i)
j,k)
 
,
(8)
where g(i)
j,k ∈MH(aj, τk) ∩G, aj ∈A, and τk ∈TH.
B. Contact Grasp Representation
The CGR serves as a fundamental descriptor of graspability,
encoding the inherent, local information of the object surface
to establish stable grasping contacts. Following prior work [20],
we parameterize each CGR a as:
a = (pc, va, vb, p, w) ,
(9)
where pc ∈R3 denotes the potential contact point on the
object surface, p ∈[0, 1] denotes the probability that this point
is a stable contact point, va ∈R3, ∥va∥= 1 denotes the
grasp approach vector, vb ∈R3, ∥vb∥= 1 denotes the grasp
baseline (closing) vector, and w ∈R+ denotes the grasp width.
As shown in Fig. 3, this representation captures fundamental,
hand-agnostic grasp contact primitives that can be shared across
different end-effectors and grasp types.
C. Hand-Specific Grasp Mapping
This subsection instantiates the mapping function MH(·)
introduced in Eq. (4). In principle, MH(·) can be implemented


6
Hand-agnostic Grasp Evaluation
Object Points
Hand URDF
Grasp Pose
Candidate
Hand-Object Interaction 
Representation Extraction
HOI Stability 
Representation
Point Transformer
Object-centric
Construction
object points & normals
hand points & normals
Local Geometric
Embeddings
...
...
Cardinality
Max
Pooling
Average 
Pooling
Standard 
Deviation 
Pooling
Dynamic
Weighting
...
Weighted
Fusion
CAMP (Contact-Aware Multi-Pooling)
Global Contact
Descriptor
Score Prediction Head
0
1
stability score
Grasp Decision Model
lift
Fig. 5: Hand-agnostic grasp evaluation. This module evaluates the physical stability of synthesized grasp candidates in a
strictly hand-agnostic manner. To achieve this, it first extracts an HOI representation to explicitly capture the local contact
geometry. Leveraging a PointTransformer [65] backbone and a contact-aware feature extraction module, the grasp decision
model dynamically aggregates these geometric features to predict a continuous stability score for each grasp pose.
by model-based [66], [67] or learning-based [18], [38], [68]
grasp synthesis methods. To achieve efficient grasp synthesis,
we instantiate it as an explicit mapping function, following the
established methodologies in prior works [69], [70], [71].
For any given grasp type, the hand closing synergy (the
first principal component of all kinematically feasible joint
configurations) captures approximately 50%–70% of the kine-
matic variance [72], [73], [74]. Building upon this insight, we
instantiate the feasible kinematics for each grasp type as a
1-D parametric manifold within the hand configuration space
QH ⊂Rn, parameterized solely by the grasp width w. For
efficient inference, we precompute this manifold as a hand-
specific lookup table. Formally, it is defined as
LH : TH × R+ →QH × SE(3),
(10)
which maps a grasp type τ and a grasp width w to a hand
configuration q∗and the corresponding Principal Closing Frame
(PCF) transformation bTpcf that denotes the pose matrix of the
PCF with respect to the hand base frame, as shown in Fig. 4.
To construct this lookup table offline, we discretize the grasp
width into a sequence {wl} and solve for the joint configuration
q∗
l,τ of each grasp type τ:
q∗
l,τ = arg min
q
∥Jw(q, Pc) −wl∥2
2 + γ
q −q∗
l−1,τ
2
2 ,
s.t. qmin ≤q ≤qmax, gτ(q) = 0.
(11)
The recursion is initialized with q∗
0,τ = qinit,τ. Here, Jw(q, Pc)
computes the grasp width from a virtual plane constructed by
transforming a set of predefined contact points Pc through
forward kinematics. In Eq. (11), the first term minimizes the
deviation from the target width, while the second term regular-
izes the solution toward the previous discretized configuration
to ensure kinematic smoothness. The constraint gτ(q) = 0
enforces taxonomy-specific kinematic constraints for grasp type
τ. After solving q∗
l,τ, we analytically compute the correspond-
ing PCF transformation bTpcf,l,τ from the same contact plane.
Finally, all pairs (wl, q∗
l,τ, bTpcf,l,τ) are precomputed and stored
as a lookup table for efficient inference.
During inference, we can reconstruct the world-frame PCF
from a CGR aj = (pc, va, vb, p, w)j:
wTpcf,j =
"
vb
va × vb
va
pc + w
2 vb
0
0
0
1
#
j
.
(12)
We retrieve the hand configuration q∗
k,τk and hand-frame PCF
transformation bTpcf,j,τk according to wj and τk. The hand
base pose and joint configuration are then computed as
Tj,k = wTpcf,j
 bTpcf,j,τk
−1 , qj,k = q∗
j,τk.
(13)
This produces the candidate grasp gj,k = (Tj,k, qj,k). We
subsequently augment each candidate by sampling five discrete
depths (0 m–0.05 m) along the approach direction va,k. Finally,
physically infeasible poses are filtered out via a fast sphere-
based collision check using the Foam [75] library, yielding the
final set of grasp candidates Gj,k =
n
g(i)
j,k
o
.
D. Hand-Object Interaction Representation
A grasp is considered stable if it can resist arbitrary external
wrenches. This state is defined by the force-closure condition,
which must satisfy the following criteria [22]:
Gf = 0,
GG
T > ϵI6×6,
f
T
i ni >
1
p
µ2 + 1
|fi| ,
(14)
where µ is the friction coefficient, f is the vector of contact
forces acting at all contact points, G is the grasp matrix
determined by the positions of the contact points, and fi and
ni are the contact force and the surface normal at the i-th
contact point. From visual perception, the information we can
extract is the positions and normals of potential contact points.
Consequently, we define the HOI representation RHOI as
the set of coordinates and normals of the contact points at
the hand-object interface. Specifically, given a grasp candidate
g(i)
j,k and the hand specification, we first extract the hand points


7
Multi-View Scene Observations
RGB Images
Camera
Parameters
Depth Images
Semantic Feature Maps
DINOv3
3D Implicit Field
PointNet++
Depth Images
Camera Parameters
Scene Raw Point Cloud
Scene
CGRs
Scene 
Semantics
Scene 
Geometry
Prediction Head
Contact-GraspNet
Spatial Understanding
Scene Semantic
Representations
Scene-level CGRs
baseline
vector
approach
vector
grasp width
contact point
Scene-level
Representations
Fig. 6: Spatial prior module. Given multi-view RGB-D observations, the spatial prior module leverages the DINOv3 [7]
features to construct scene semantic representations RS and predict scene-level CGRs AS. The predicted CGRs provide spatially
feasible contact candidates for the base grasp policy to perform clutter-aware grasp planning.
PH = {ph
nh}Nh
nh=1 and normals NH = {nh
nh}Nh
nh=1 via forward
kinematics. Analogously, the object points and normals are
denoted as PO =

po
no
	 No
no=1 and NO =

no
no
	 No
no=1. To
identify contact regions, we compute the Euclidean distance
from each object point to the hand surface:
dno = min
nh
po
no −ph
nh

2 .
(15)
Points whose distance is below a proximity threshold δd are
treated as contact pairs. The valid contact-pair index set is
X =

(no, n∗
h) | dno < δd, n∗
h = arg min
nh
po
no −ph
nh

2

.
(16)
The HOI representation is then constructed as
RHOI =
 po
no, no
no, ph
nh, nh
nh

| (no, nh) ∈X
	
.
(17)
This representation provides a unified evaluation interface
across different hand embodiments.
E. Hand-Agnostic Grasp Evaluation
This subsection instantiates the grasp decision model D(·) in
Eq. (7). We implement D(·) as a lightweight point-based neural
network that predicts a scalar stability score from RHOI.
As illustrated in Fig. 5, we adopt an object-centric formula-
tion to construct the HOI representation. For each valid contact
pair (no, nh), the object contact point po
no ∈R3 serves as the
spatial coordinate, while the remaining geometric attributes
form the point-wise feature vector [no
no, ph
nh, nh
nh] ∈R9. The
network takes this feature point cloud PHOI ∈R|X|×(3+9) as
input. Subsequently, a PointTransformer [65] encoder serves
as a sparse backbone to extract local geometric embeddings
Ugeo ∈R|X|×Cgeo from this point cloud. To handle the variable
number of contacts, we introduce a Contact-Aware Multi-
Pooling (CAMP) mechanism. It computes max, mean, and
standard-deviation statistics, denoted as umax, umean, and ustd,
and dynamically fuses them through a learnable weight vector:
w = Softmax (ψ ([umax, umean, ustd, ϕ(|X|)])) ,
(18)
where ϕ(·) and ψ(·) are Multi-layer Perceptrons (MLPs) that
encode the contact cardinality and project the fused features.
The global contact descriptor is
z = w1umax + w2umean + w3ustd.
(19)
Finally, an MLP maps z to a scalar stability score:
β = σ (MLP(z)) ,
(20)
where σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function. To train the grasp
decision model, we use the Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) loss,
with the optimization objective defined as:
LBCE = −[yi log(βi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −βi)] ,
(21)
where yi ∈{0, 1} represents the ground truth label, and βi
denotes the predicted probability for the i-th sample.
V. FOUNDATION PRIORS FOR ADAPTIVE GRASPING
This section instantiates the transformation function fτ(·)
with composable foundation priors. We consider three tasks
with increasing complexity: grasping in cluttered scenes,
functional grasping in cluttered scenes, and functional grasping
in dynamic cluttered scenes. For these tasks, the transformation
function is dynamically configured as
fτ =





Ms,
cluttered grasping,
Mc ◦Ms,
functional grasping,
Mt ◦Mc ◦Ms,
dynamic grasping.
(22)
Here, Ms, Mc, and Mt denote the spatial-prior (Sec. V-A),
cognitive-prior (Sec. V-B), and temporal-prior (Sec. V-C)
modules, respectively, all of which can be flexibly instantiated
by diverse composable foundation priors.
A. Spatial Prior for Cluttered Grasping
For grasping in cluttered scenes, where multiple objects are
densely stacked in an unorganized manner, the task context
consists of the multi-view scene observations S:
Cs = {S}, S = {Im, Dm}Nv
m=1,
(23)
where Im and Dm denote the RGB image and depth map from
the m-th camera view. Given the scene observations, the spatial


8
Distal 
Type
Adduction
Grip
Large
Diameter
Small 
Diameter
Sphere 3 
Finger
Writing
Tripod
Tip Pinch /
Ring
Human-like Functional Grasp Types
...
Language
Instructions
Hand
Grasp Types
Object
Functional Parts
“Pick the scissor for cutting”
Distal Type
Finger Rings
“Handover me the knife”
Lateral
Knife Blade
...
Few-shot Functional Grasping Examples
Grasping Examples Documentation
Prismatic 2
Finger
Type 1
Type 2
"Grasp the mug to pour water"
Task Instruction
Seed-1.8
(Reason)
Multi-view
RGB Images
Grasp Examples
Documentation
Cognitive Reasoning
Multimodal
Search Agent 
Knowledge
Query
Visual Grounding
Agent 
ReACT
CoT
Planning
Memory
Long Term
Short Term
Functionality
Prior
Grounding
Prompt
Grounding
Results
②
③
Tool 
Calling
...
①
④
"Target": "Red Ceramic Mug",
"Parts": ["Handle", "Body"],
"Ranked_Grasp_Types": [
    ["Medium Wrap", ...],
    ["Large Diameter", ...],
], ...
Grasp Functionality Prediction
SAM3
segment
Annotated RGB Images
⑤
3D Implicit Field
⑥
⑦
Depth Images
Camera Parameters
Point-wise
Feature Alignment
handle
mug
mug
handle
3D Segmented
Features
Segmented
Feature Maps
⑧
⑨
Object Geometry
Functional CGRs
Agentic RAG
Scene-level
Representations
Fig. 7: Cognitive prior module. Given scene observations and a language instruction, the cognitive prior module uses an
LLM with RAG [23] and CoT [24] mechanism to infer the target object, functional part, and hand-compatible grasp types.
It then employs SAM3 [25] and 3D lifting to align these inferred results with scene representations, producing the target
object geometry O, object-level semantics RO, and functional CGRs AO. These outputs, together with TH, provide the
task-conditioned interface for the base grasp policy to perform language-guided functional grasping.
prior module Ms(·) extracts scene semantic representations
RS and scene-level CGR candidates AS:
Ms : S 7→
 RS, AS
,
(24)
where RS = {rns}|RS|
ns=1 and AS = {ajs}|AS|
js=1. These outputs
provide the geometry and feasible contact primitives required
for grasping in clutter. The pipeline is depicted in Fig. 6.
1) Scene Semantics Construction: To construct point-wise
scene semantic representations, each RGB image is fed into
the DINOv3 [7] encoder to extract pixel-level semantic feature
maps, denoted as Wsem = {wsem
m }Nv
m=1. Here, wsem
m
∈
RH×W ×Csem denotes the semantic feature map of the m-th
view, where H and W are the image height and width, and
Csem is the semantic feature dimension.
We then lift these 2D semantic features into 3D space by
using an implicit field function F(· | W) [76]. This function
maps an arbitrary 3D point to a feature vector by querying
dense multi-view image features:
u = F(p | W),
(25)
where p ∈R3 denotes a spatial point and u ∈RC is its
corresponding feature vector. For each point ps
ns ∈R3 in the
scene point cloud PS ∈RNs×3, we query the semantic implicit
field constructed from Wsem to obtain its semantic descriptor:
rns = F
 ps
ns | Wsem
.
(26)
Aggregating the semantic descriptors of all scene points yields
the scene semantic representations RS.
2) Scene-level CGRs Prediction: To predict scene-level
CGRs from the multi-view scene observations, we adopt the
PyTorch implementation of Contact-GraspNet1. We train this
1https://github.com/SeungBack/gc6d-contact-graspnet
network on the GraspClutter6D [27] dataset, retaining the
original hyperparameter settings. Given the scene point cloud
PS and semantic representations RS, the network produces
dense per-point CGRs {ans}. During inference, we reconstruct
the scene-level CGR set by filtering these dense predictions
with the contact probability threshold δc:
AS = {ans | pns > δc} = {ajs}.
(27)
Together with the scene geometry and all available grasp types,
these CGRs construct the task-conditioned interface for clutter-
aware grasping. This interface further serves as the input to
the cognitive prior, where the most suitable grasp type and
target region are selected according to the task instruction.
B. Cognitive Prior for Functional Grasping
For functional grasping in cluttered scenes, the task context
further includes a natural language instruction ℓ:
Cc = {S, ℓ}.
(28)
Given the multi-view scene observations and language instruc-
tion, the cognitive prior module Mc(·) infers the target object,
functional part, and appropriate grasp types, and then aligns
these constraints with 3D scene representations:
Mc :
 S, ℓ, RS, AS
7→
 O, TH, RO, AO
,
(29)
where RO = {rno}|RO|
no=1 represents the set of object semantic
representations extracted from the scene representations RS,
while AO = {ajo}|AO|
jo=1 denotes the functional CGRs aligned
with the grounded target object and the functional part.
1) Grasp Functionality Inference: To understand human
language instructions, we instantiate a parsing function Ψ(·)


9
with an LLM to infer the structured grasp specification:
(ℓobj, ℓpart, TH) = Ψ (S, ℓ) ,
(30)
where ℓobj and ℓpart denote the language descriptors for the
target object and its functional part. Direct inference of these
physically grounded attributes is non-trivial due to the inherent
lack of grasp reasoning in standard LLMs. To bridge this gap,
we employ Seed-1.82 as the core reasoning agent, augmented
with RAG [23] and CoT [24] mechanisms.
As shown in Fig. 7, we construct a grasp taxonomy database
that encodes detailed attributes for predefined grasp types,
including functional intent, active finger configurations, contact
constraints, and use-case examples. By retrieving relevant
knowledge from this database, we constrain the inference space
and mitigate hallucinations in LLMs. Furthermore, we use
CoT prompting to decompose the inference into task intent
identification, functional part selection, and grasp requirement
analysis, ultimately outputting ℓobj, ℓpart, and TH.
2) Object Semantic Representation Refinement: Then, we
ground the parsed object description ℓobj in the scene semantic
representations. To localize the target object, we perform visual
grounding conditioned on the parsed object description, such as
“the mug”. Specifically, we use Seed-1.8 to generate bounding-
box annotations on multi-view RGB images. These annotations
are then used as prompts for SAM3 [25] to extract multi-view
instance masks, denoted as Winst = {winst
m }Nv
m=1.
We further lift the 2D instance masks into 3D space using
the implicit field function defined in Eq. (25), yielding a point-
wise instance probability uinst
ns
∈[0, 1] for each scene point.
To obtain object semantic representations, we filter the scene-
level representations and retain only those associated with the
grounded target instance:
RO ≜

rns ∈RS | uinst
ns > δinst
	
= {rno}.
(31)
The corresponding target object geometry O is extracted from
the scene point cloud using the same grounded instance mask.
3) Functional CGRs Alignment: We further use the parsed
part description ℓpart, such as “the handle”, to restrict grasp
generation to the corresponding functional regions. Analogous
to the instance grounding, we derive a point-wise functional
probability ufun
ns
∈[0, 1] by identifying functional regions
through visual grounding and 3D lifting. To extract task-relevant
contact primitives, we filter the scene-level CGR set AS by
enforcing both instance-level and functional-level consistency:
AO ≜

ans ∈AS | uinst
ns > δinst ∧ufun
ns > δfun
	
= {ajo} ,
(32)
This set provides functionally relevant and spatially feasible
CGR candidates for grasp synthesis. Together with the object
geometry O and the inferred grasp types TH, it forms the task-
conditioned interface for language-guided functional grasping.
C. Temporal Prior for Dynamic Grasping
For functional grasping in dynamic cluttered scenes, the task
context comprises a continuous observation sequence and a
2https://github.com/ByteDance-Seed/Seed-1.8
Temporal Tracking
Visual Observation
Kalman
Filter
Dynamic Grasping
 Scenario
Foundation
Models
3D Implicit Field
Segmented Mask Tracking
mask
features
semantic
features
Semantic Field Construction
Rigid Transformation
Estimation
Feature Matching
Gradient Optimization
...
...
update
predict
DINOv3  SAM3
Fig. 8: Temporal prior module. This module integrates the
temporal mask-tracking mechanism of SAM3 [25] with the
cross-frame consistency of DINOv3 [7] features to estimate
the target’s rigid motion. The estimated motion is then used to
update the structured interface, enabling the base grasp policy
to perform temporally consistent dynamic grasping.
language instruction:
Ct = {S0:t, ℓ}.
(33)
At the initial time step t = 0, the spatial and cognitive priors
construct the initial grasp interface:
I0 =
 O0, AO
0 , TH

.
(34)
The temporal prior module Mt(·) updates this interface across
continuous observations to maintain temporally consistent grasp
tracking:
Mt : (I0, S1:t) 7→It = (Ot, At, TH) .
(35)
Under the rigid-body assumption, if a grasp is stable at
the initial time step, it remains stable at subsequent time
steps provided that the hand strictly tracks the object’s rigid
motion. Therefore, we instantiate Mt(·) to estimate the real-
time SE(3) transformation of the target object. The estimated
transformation is subsequently applied to update the grasp
interface, providing temporally consistent inputs for the base
grasp policy. The pipeline is depicted in Fig. 8.
1) Object Tracking Consistency: To maintain object tracking
consistency, we leverage the mask-based tracking mechanism of
SAM3 [25]. Instead of performing independent visual ground-
ing at each time step, we initialize the target instance mask
Winst
0
at the initial time step and propagate it over time. This
mask-based tracking strategy effectively mitigates sequential
segmentation instability and semantic drift, ensuring that the
tracked instance mask Winst
t
remains strictly consistent with
the target object throughout the grasping process. Subsequently,
Ot is extracted from the real-time scene observation and Winst
t
.
2) Object Pose Estimation: To estimate the target’s rigid
transformation matrix T O
0→t ∈SE(3), we construct a seman-
tic consistency optimization problem [76]. Specifically, we
denote the object’s point cloud at the initial time step as


10
Fig. 9: Data collection in simulation. To train and evaluate
the grasp decision model, we collect synthetic data via trial and
error in Isaac Sim. The dataset comprises 4.4 million annotated
grasping trials across three diverse robotic hands.
PO,0 = {po
no,0}No
no=1, and the corresponding set of semantic
descriptors as RO
0 = {ro
no,0}No
no=1. At time step t, we compute
the optimal rotation R∗
0→t and translation t∗
0→t that minimize
the discrepancy between the initial semantic descriptors and
the features queried from the current scene’s implicit field
F(· | Wsem
t
). The optimization objective is defined as:
(R∗
0→t, t∗
0→t) = arg min
R0→t,t0→t
No
X
no=1
F
 ˆpo
no,t | Wsem
t

−ro
no,0
2
2 ,
ˆpo
no,t = R0→tpo
no,0 + t0→t.
(36)
Since the implicit field function F(· | W) is differentiable,
this optimization can be solved using gradient-based methods.
In practice, we further incorporate rigid-body constraints and
distance regularization to improve robustness and stability.
Consequently, given the estimated target object’s rotation
and translation (R∗
0→t, t∗
0→t), the real-time contact interface
can be directly computed from the initial contact reference:
At =

R∗
0→t
t∗
0→t
0
0
0
1

a | a ∈A0

.
(37)
In practice, we observe that the pose-estimation error remains
within an admissible tolerance. Therefore, to maximize system
efficiency, we bypass the base grasp policy and directly update
the initial grasp pose g0 = (T0, q0) via the rigid transformation:
gt =

R∗
0→t
t∗
0→t
0
0
0
1

T0, q0

.
(38)
VI. SIMULATED EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we systematically validate the key compo-
nents of AdaRoboVLG in simulation. We first introduce the
data collection and training setup (Sec. VI-A), and then evaluate
the base policy for generalizable grasp synthesis (Sec. VI-B),
the spatial prior for cluttered grasping (Sec. VI-C), the cognitive
prior for functional grasping (Sec. VI-D), and the temporal
prior for dynamic grasping (Sec. VI-E).
A. Data Collection and Training Implementation
1) Data Collection and Annotation: To train the grasp
decision model D(·), we collect data via trial and error on
single-object grasping in a physics-based simulator (see Fig. 9).
All object models are sourced from the training sets of the
GraspNet-1Billion [28] and GraspClutter6D [27] benchmarks.
Our data generation pipeline consists of two stages.
In the first stage, we densely sample CGR candidates on the
object surface. Candidates satisfying basic force-closure criteria
are then mapped into executable hand poses via MH(·) defined
in Sec. IV-C. In the second stage, we execute these proposals in
Isaac Sim to evaluate grasp stability, with the friction coefficient
set to 0.5. After the hand closes to establish contact, we apply
a 0.5 N external perturbation force to the object along six axis-
aligned directions. A grasp is labeled as successful (y = 1) only
if the object’s translational displacement remains under 0.05 m
and rotational deviation under 30◦; otherwise, it is labeled as a
failure (y = 0). We apply this pipeline to three diverse robotic
hands (DH3, Allegro, and Inspire). For each hand, we collect
1,000 grasping trials for every combination of object and grasp
type, balanced between positive and negative examples. With
200 training objects and the grasp types available for each hand
(4 for DH3, 10 for Allegro, and 8 for Inspire), this process
yields 4.4 million annotated grasping trials in total. We partition
the dataset into training and validation sets at a 10:1 ratio.
2) Training Implementation: We implement the grasp de-
cision model in PyTorch on Ubuntu 20.04, and train it on a
server with dual Intel Xeon 6330 28-core CPUs, four NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs, and 256 GB of RAM. We use the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1 × 10−4 and a weight
decay of 0.05. The model is trained for 30 epochs with a batch
size of 512, using the binary cross-entropy loss and a cosine
annealing learning rate scheduler.
Throughout training and inference, the feasible grasp types
for each hand follow the setup in AnyDexGrasp [71]. To
enhance robustness against real-world observation noise, we
inject Gaussian perturbations (σ = 0.005 m for coordinates,
σ = 0.02 for normals) during model training. During inference,
a grasp is considered stable if the predicted score β > 0.5.
B. Evaluation of the Base Policy for General Grasp Synthesis
The base policy consists of two stages: hand-specific grasp
mapping and hand-agnostic grasp evaluation. The first stage is
instantiated as an explicit function and supports deployment
across end-effectors with two to five fingers, as demonstrated
in subsequent experiments. Therefore, we focus on evaluating
the proposed HOI representation and grasp decision model on
learning efficiency and cross-hand grasp evaluation.
1) Learning Efficiency: To evaluate the impact of different
input representations on the learning efficiency of the decision
model, we train the model on the Allegro hand using the syn-
thetic grasping data constructed in Sec. VI-A. We compare three
input paradigms: object-centric HOI, hand-centric HOI, and an
explicitly separated hand-object point cloud representation. The
former two encode the HOI relationship from object-centric
and hand-centric perspectives, respectively, while the latter
independently encodes the contact point clouds of the hand
and object and then concatenates their features. All compared
variants share the same network architecture, and convergence
behavior is evaluated through the training loss curves.
As illustrated in Fig. 10a, compared with the separated
representation, the HOI representations lead to faster network


11
0
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
0
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
Training Loss
0.269
0.269
0.302
HOI (Object-centric)
HOI (Hand-centric)
Separate Encoding
Training Step
(a) Training convergence.
82.95%
88.02%
91.07%
55.44%
72.48%
89.06%
56.25%
86.31%
74.25%
81.26%
75.46%
65.99%
DH3
Allegro
Inspire
All
Inspire
Allegro
DH3
Evaluation Hand
Training Data
(b) Cross-hand accuracy.
Fig. 10: Comparative experiments of the grasp decision
model. (a) Training loss of the grasp decision model using
different representations. (b) Grasp quality prediction accuracy
of the grasp decision model trained on different hand data.
Fig. 11: t-SNE visualization of HOI representations. This
figure visualizes the distributions of stable HOI representations
across three different robotic hands (DH3, Allegro, and Inspire).
convergence and lower final training losses. This improvement
is mainly attributed to the ability of the HOI representation to
abstract the complex force-closure condition into a compact
feature point cloud, thereby substantially reducing the learning
difficulty for the network.
2) Cross-hand Generalization: To evaluate whether the HOI
representation enables cross-hand generalization of the decision
model, we train the decision model using single-hand data and
the combined data from all three hands, respectively. The grasp
quality prediction accuracy is then evaluated across the three
robotic hands.
As shown in Fig. 10b, the model jointly trained on data from
all three robotic hands achieves accuracies of 82.95%, 88.02%,
and 91.07% on the DH3, Allegro, and Inspire, respectively, out-
performing the single-hand training configurations overall. This
result demonstrates that the HOI representation successfully
facilitates shared stability judgment across different robotic
hands, thereby enhancing cross-hand generalization capabilities.
Furthermore, we provide a t-SNE visualization of stable HOI
representations across the three robotic hands (see Fig. 11). The
feature distributions exhibit substantial overlap in the shared
embedding space, with no obvious clustering induced by kine-
matic or structural differences. This observation is consistent
with the hand-agnostic property of the HOI representation
and provides qualitative evidence for its suitability for joint
multi-hand training and cross-hand generalization.
C. Evaluation of Spatial Prior for Clutter-Aware Grasping
This experiment evaluates the effectiveness of the spatial
prior in transforming multi-view observations into scene-level
contact constraints for grasp synthesis, supporting spatially
feasible grasp generation under different levels of scene clutter.
1) Benchmark Setting: We adopt the simulated benchmark
proposed in DexGraspNet 2.0 [26], which is built upon the
GraspNet-1Billion dataset [28], and comprises 450 scenes and
88 diverse objects. To evaluate the model performance under
different clutter levels, the test scenes are categorized into three
difficulty splits based on object density:
• Dense consists of 90 scenes from the test set in GraspNet-
1Billion [28], with each scene containing 8-11 objects.
• Random comprises 180 scenes by augmenting the dense
split twice, where each scene retains 1-10 random objects.
• Loose contains 180 scenes by augmenting the dense split
twice, with 1-2 random objects remaining in the scene.
All experiments are conducted in Isaac Gym, where the friction
coefficient is set to µ = 0.2.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We report the grasp success rate, fol-
lowing the same evaluation protocol as DexGraspNet 2.0 [26].
Specifically, a grasp trial is considered a success if the highest-
scoring grasp pose lifts the object off the table without any
initial collision with the table or surrounding objects.
3) Baseline Models: We compare AdaRoboVLG against
AnyDexGrasp [71] and its variant, AnyDexGrasp∗. AnyDex-
Grasp is a two-stage dexterous grasping framework that first
predicts a hand-agnostic grasp representation to generate hand-
specific grasp candidates, and subsequently employs a hand-
specific decision model to select executable grasps. Because
it supports the same three robotic hands and adopts a grasp
taxonomy consistent with ours, we construct AnyDexGrasp∗
as a variant augmented with our grasp decision model.
4) Experimental Details: AnyDexGrasp, AnyDexGrasp∗,
and AdaRoboVLG are evaluated in a zero-shot manner on three
robotic hands spanning three to five fingers (DH3, Allegro,
and Inspire), without any re-training. For AnyDexGrasp and
AnyDexGrasp∗, we use the officially released representation
model to generate hand-agnostic grasp candidates. AnyDex-
Grasp scores these candidates with its original decision model,
whereas AnyDexGrasp∗uses our grasp decision model for
candidate ranking. During inference, the highest-scoring grasp
pose is selected for execution.
5) Experimental Results: As shown in Tab. I, AdaRoboVLG
exhibits strong zero-shot and cross-hand grasp synthesis in
cluttered scenes. Compared with AnyDexGrasp, it achieves
the highest success rates on the random and loose splits for
all three hands, with average success-rate improvements of
3.0% and 9.2%. Although AnyDexGrasp performs slightly
better on the dense split, AdaRoboVLG shows more stable
performance across different clutter levels. This primarily stems
from compact CGRs and the human-inspired grasp taxonomy,
which significantly reduce the grasp search space, thereby
enabling better adaptation to scenes of varying complexity.


12
TABLE I: Performance comparison of multi-finger grasp
pose generation in clutter on the DexGraspNet 2.0 [26]
benchmark. We report the grasp success rates across three
clutter difficulty levels (i.e., Dense, Random, and Loose),
comparing various methods across different robotic hands. The
best results are highlighted in bold and underlined.
Methods
Hands
Success Rate (%)
Dense
Random Loose
AnyDexGrasp [71]
DH3
91.2
85.5
78.2
AnyDexGrasp∗
DH3
87.8
86.4
85.7
AdaRoboVLG (ours)
DH3
90.3
89.5
88.6
AnyDexGrasp [71]
Allegro
90.5
86.6
79.4
AnyDexGrasp∗
Allegro
88.2
87.2
83.8
AdaRoboVLG (ours)
Allegro
89.5
88.2
85.9
AnyDexGrasp [71]
Inspire
92.7
85.0
76.1
AnyDexGrasp∗
Inspire
86.1
85.4
83.9
AdaRoboVLG (ours)
Inspire
88.1
88.5
86.7
The comparison with AnyDexGrasp∗further validates our
grasp decision model. Given the same grasp candidates as Any-
DexGrasp, AnyDexGrasp∗improves the average success rate by
0.6% on the random split and 6.6% on the loose split. Moreover,
AdaRoboVLG consistently outperforms AnyDexGrasp∗across
all three hands, indicating that both the spatial prior and the
hand-agnostic grasp decision model jointly contribute to robust
multi-finger grasp synthesis.
D. Evaluation of Cognitive Prior for Functional Grasping
This experiment evaluates the effectiveness of the cognitive
prior in converting language instructions into functional grasp
constraints for grasp synthesis. Because current simulation
benchmarks fall short in jointly evaluating grasp functionality
inference, target grounding, and physical grasp execution, we
assess this prior module from two complementary experiments:
grasp functionality inference on open-set instructions and
language-guided target grasping in simulated clutter.
1) Grasp Functionality Inference: To evaluate grasp func-
tionality inference, we construct an open-set instruction dataset
based on instruction templates [29], [77]. The dataset contains
125 image-instruction pairs spanning 57 manipulation tasks
and 80 object categories, with human-annotated ground-truth
functional grasp intents. We report functional part and grasp
type accuracy as evaluation metrics.
We conduct an ablation study to evaluate the individual
contributions of the CoT and RAG mechanisms in the cogni-
tive reasoning module. Tab. II demonstrates that integrating
RAG and CoT techniques substantially improves the model’s
grasp functionality inference accuracy. This efficient design
eliminates the reliance on large-scale language-action paired
data, thereby substantially reducing the overall learning cost.
2) Language-Guided Target Grasping: To evaluate language-
guided target grasping, we construct a simulated benchmark in
Isaac Sim using the test splits of GraspNet-1Billion [28] and
GraspClutter6D [27]. For each scene, objects are initialized
with their original poses and assigned a mass of 1.0 kg and a
friction coefficient of 0.5. The experimental platform consists
TABLE II: Experimental results of grasp functionality
inference on open-set instructions. We report the accuracy
of grasp functionality inference under different settings. The
best results are highlighted in bold and underlined.
Method
Functional Part
Accuracy ↑
Grasp Type
Accuracy ↑
Base LLM
0.82
0.63
Base LLM + CoT
0.91
0.66
Base LLM + RAG
0.85
0.78
AdaRoboVLG (ours)
0.94
0.87
TABLE III: Experimental results of language-guided target
grasping for multi-finger hands on the GraspClutter6D [27]
and GraspNet-1Billion [28] datasets. We report the grasp
success rates of three dexterous hands on two datasets. The
best results are highlighted in bold and underlined.
Methods
Success Rate (%)
DH3
Allegro
Inspire
GraspClutter6D (235 scenes)
D(R, O)-Grasp [50]
64.7
52.1
55.9
AnyDexGrasp [71]
82.5
74.1
79.3
AnyDexGrasp∗
82.9
75.9
81.4
AdaRoboVLG (ours)
84.9
76.4
82.6
GraspNet-1Billion (90 scenes)
D(R, O)-Grasp [50]
66.2
53.3
57.3
AnyDexGrasp [71]
85.2
80.8
84.4
AnyDexGrasp∗
86.6
81.2
85.0
AdaRoboVLG (ours)
88.9
82.2
86.9
of a UR5 robotic arm equipped with three different robotic
hands: DH3, Allegro, and Inspire. Five static cameras are used
to capture the scene, including four surrounding cameras at
a 45◦elevation angle and one top-down camera. To enable
language-guided grasping, we use Qwen3.5-VL3 to generate
language instructions offline by selecting the top five graspable
objects in each scene and synthesizing commands following
the templates introduced in [82]. This process produces five
predefined language-guided grasping tasks for each scene.
Each task is executed once with each robotic hand. A trial
is successful if the hand grasps the target object and lifts it to
a height of 10 cm. We report the average grasp success rate
separately for each hand.
We compare AdaRoboVLG with three baseline models:
AnyDexGrasp [71], AnyDexGrasp∗, and D(R, O)-Grasp [50].
AnyDexGrasp and AnyDexGrasp∗have been introduced in
Sec. VI-C3. D(R, O)-Grasp is a representative cross-hand dex-
terous grasping method designed for object-centric grasp syn-
thesis. For fair comparison, all methods are combined with the
same cognitive reasoning module as ours for language ground-
ing and target segmentation. AnyDexGrasp and AnyDexGrasp∗
follow the implementation detailed in Sec. VI-C3, utilizing
the cognitive reasoning module to filter task-consistent grasp
candidates based on the language instruction. For D(R, O)-
Grasp, we train the model in a multi-hand setting using grasp
3https://qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5


13
TABLE IV: Experimental results of dynamic grasping on the GraspNet-1Billion [28] benchmark. We report the grasp
tracking accuracy (MGTA), mean translation error (etrans), and mean rotation error (erot) across three difficulty splits (Seen,
Similar, and Novel). The best results are highlighted in bold and underlined.
Methods
Seen
Similar
Novel
MGTA↑
etrans(cm) ↓
erot(◦) ↓
MGTA↑
etrans(cm) ↓
erot(◦) ↓
MGTA↑
etrans(cm) ↓
erot(◦) ↓
Nearest
-0.81
15.2
95.98
-0.80
15.4
97.61
-0.83
16.6
96.90
AnyGrasp [78]
-0.32
2.31
53.24
-0.30
2.68
57.59
-0.39
2.93
58.49
BundleTrack [79]
0.74
1.52
15.8
0.72
1.47
16.37
0.72
1.93
15.41
Target-referenced [80]
0.84
1.34
10.15
0.85
1.52
9.84
0.78
1.9
12.96
MotionGrasp [81]
0.99
1.1
0.86
0.99
1.1
0.84
0.99
1.07
1.12
AdaRoboVLG (ours)
1.0
0.22
3.57
1.0
0.23
3.68
1.0
0.28
3.28
0.8
5.0
10.0
0
32
64
96
128
160
192
224
255
Tracking Frame Index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
20
50
80
0
32
64
96
128
160
192
224
255
Tracking Frame Index
0
5
10
15
20
Translation Error (cm)
Rotation Error (deg)
scissors
strawberry
flat screwdriver
i toy airplane
rhinocero
(a) Tracking errors for partial objects in Scene 0100.
scissors
strawberry
i toy airplane
success
success
success
success
fail
fail
fail
fail
fail
(b) Tracking visualization for partial objects in Scene 0100.
Fig. 12: Long-horizon tracking results for representative objects in scene 0100 of the GraspNet-1Billion [28] dataset. (a)
Continuous tracking errors for selected objects. (b) Image-space projections of tracked 3D semantic features.
samples synthesized via the DexGraspNet [83] pipeline on
objects from the training sets of both benchmarks. During
inference, the cognitive reasoning module first localizes the
target object; subsequently, D(R, O)-Grasp generates grasp
candidates from the segmented object point cloud and randomly
selects a collision-free pose for execution. All methods are
evaluated in a zero-shot manner without further fine-tuning,
with all grasp types enabled.
As shown in Tab. III, AdaRoboVLG achieves the highest
success rates on both datasets, outperforming AnyDexGrasp
by 2.7% on GraspClutter6D and 2.5% on GraspNet-1Billion.
Compared with D(R, O)-Grasp, the average improvements are
even more substantial, reaching 23.7% and 27.1%, respectively.
These results demonstrate that LLM-based grounding and
SAM3-based segmentation provide accurate target constraints,
enabling the base policy to generate executable and semantically
consistent grasp poses. The combination of the cognitive
reasoning module and the base policy yields the best language-
guided target grasping performance.
E. Evaluation of Temporal Prior for Dynamic Grasping
This experiment evaluates the capability of the temporal
prior to convert continuous visual observations into tempo-
rally consistent motion constraints for grasp updates, thereby
enabling robust grasp tracking.
1) Benchmark Setting: We conduct experiments using the
GraspNet-1Billion [28] benchmark. This benchmark is collected
by moving a camera around each scene, which effectively
simulates relative object motion and is highly suitable for
evaluating dynamic grasping. Each scene contains 256 RGB-D
images captured from different viewpoints.
2) Evaluation Metrics: Following prior work [80], we
employ Multiple Grasp Tracking Accuracy (MGTA) as the
primary performance metric. It measures the alignment between
the predicted grasps in the current frame and the ground-truth
projections derived from the initial frame. It is defined as:
MGTA = 1 −
P
t(FNt + FPt + IDSWt)
P
t GTt
,
(39)
where False Negatives (FN) and False Positives (FP) represent
missed matches and false associations in the grasp-trajectory
association, respectively. ID Switching (IDSW) counts the
instances where a grasp is erroneously assigned to a different
object ID. An MGTA score of 1 indicates perfect tracking.
Moreover, geometric precision is evaluated using the mean
translation error etrans and rotation error erot between the pre-
dicted grasps and the corresponding ground-truth projections.
3) Baseline Models: We compare AdaRoboVLG with five
baseline models, comprising Nearest, AnyGrasp [78], Bundle-
Track [79], Target-referenced [80], and MotionGrasp [81].
4) Experimental Details: Following the protocol in prior
work [81], we use the data captured by the RealSense for
training and evaluation. To train the baselines, we extract 250
video clips per scene by sequentially grouping 7 consecutive
frames. For evaluation, we extract 17 clips from each test scene
and use the first 7 frames of each clip for grasp tracking. In
the baseline setup, the top-10 highest-scoring grasp candidates
are selected from the initial frame for the model to track.


14
In contrast, our tracking module is entirely training-free. We
formulate grasp tracking as a rigid object motion estimation
problem. Consequently, geometric precision measurement is
equivalent to evaluating the object pose estimation errors.
Meanwhile, the MGTA metric is computed based on instance-
level tracking accuracy. For each test clip, we randomly select
2 to 3 objects for tracking. Given their masks in the initial
frame, we predict their continuous poses across the video clip
and report both the geometric errors and association metrics.
In practice, to solve the optimization objective in Eq. (36), we
employ the Adam optimizer [84] for 100 iterations.
5) Experimental Results: As shown in Tab. IV, our method
demonstrates temporally consistent grasp tracking performance
in dynamic scenarios. It achieves perfect association accuracy,
the lowest translation error, and competitive rotation error. This
stable tracking capability is enabled by integrating the robust
mask tracking capability of SAM3 [25] with the cross-frame
semantic consistency of DINOv3 [7] features.
We further conduct a long-horizon tracking evaluation on
representative objects from Scene 0100 of the GraspNet-
1Billion [28] benchmark. As illustrated in Fig. 12a, our method
robustly tracks most objects (e.g., the scissors) with average
translation and rotation errors around 0.5 cm and 5◦. However,
as shown in Fig. 12b, tracking failures primarily emerge in
two challenging scenarios: (1) highly symmetric objects (e.g.,
the strawberry) experience rotation estimation drift due to their
rotational invariance, and (2) severely occluded objects with
minimal initial visibility (e.g., the i toy airplane) lack sufficient
discriminative semantic cues, leading to catastrophic tracking
loss and translation deviation during viewpoint changes.
VII. REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENTS
This section demonstrates the real-world applicability of
AdaRoboVLG by progressively composing different foundation
priors to address increasingly challenging grasping scenarios.
After introducing the experimental setup (Sec. VII-A), we
first evaluate the composition of spatial and cognitive priors
for functional grasping in static cluttered scenes (Sec. VII-B).
We then further increase task complexity by incorporating
the temporal prior to handle functional grasping in dynamic
cluttered environments (Sec. VII-C). Finally, we demonstrate
the extensibility of AdaRoboVLG to new tasks and grasp
requirements (Sec. VII-D).
A. Experimental Setup
1) Hardware Platforms : As shown in Fig. 13, we conduct
real-world experiments on three robotic platforms, including the
KEENON XMAN-R1 prototype, TianJi Marvin, and AgileX
Piper, equipped with two types of end-effectors: a parallel-jaw
gripper and a 6-DoF ROHand dexterous hand. Specifically, on
the XMAN-R1 and TianJi Marvin platforms equipped with
the dexterous hand, we quantitatively evaluate language-guided
functional grasping in cluttered scenes. To further investigate
the deployment capability across different end-effectors, we
equip the TianJi Marvin with a parallel-jaw gripper and conduct
the same evaluation under the identical cluttered-scene setting.
Furthermore, on the AgileX Piper platform, we evaluate the
(a)
Partial Testing Objects
KEENON XMAN-R1
Cluttered
Scenes
Workspace
Dexterous Hand
ORBBEC DaBai DCW
ORBBEC Gemini 2
TianJi Marvin
ORBBEC Gemini 2
AgileX Pika Gripper
Testing Objects
ORBBEC Gemini 336L
Dexterous Hand
ORBBEC DaBai DCW
ORBBEC Gemini 2
(b)
(c)
AgileX Piper
RealSense D455 
ORBBEC Gemini 2
Workspace
250mm
(d)
Tracking Objects
ORBBEC DaBai DCW
AgileX Piper
Dexterous Hand
ORBBEC Gemini 2
Conveyor Belt (75cm)
Tracking Objects
Fig. 13: Real-world robotic platforms. We conduct experi-
ments on three robotic platforms with different end-effectors:
(a) KEENON XMAN-R1 prototype equipped with a dexterous
hand, (b) TianJi Marvin equipped with a dexterous hand and a
parallel-jaw gripper, (c) AgileX Piper equipped with a dexterous
hand, and (d) AgileX Piper equipped with a parallel-jaw gripper.
system’s functional grasping performance in dynamic cluttered
scenes and quantitatively verify the temporal robustness of
grasp tracking under human-induced disturbances. The real-
time inference of the entire system is executed on a workstation
equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.
2) Evaluation Protocols: To evaluate the zero-shot perfor-
mance of our method in the real world, we construct a test set
of 102 everyday objects with diverse shapes, materials, and
textures, covering six categories: food (22 objects), household
items (22), tools (18), toys (13), electronics (13), and textiles
(14). A trial is considered successful only when the target
object is correctly identified, the executed grasp satisfies the
functional requirement, no collision occurs with surrounding
objects during execution, and the object is lifted by 10 cm and
held for 5 s without being dropped. Under this protocol, we
directly evaluate the sim-to-real performance of AdaRoboVLG
without real-world fine-tuning, using both a parallel-jaw gripper
and the ROHand across representative real-world grasping tasks.
The feasible grasp types for the ROHand follow the Inspire-
hand grasp taxonomy defined in [71].


15
Food
"Unscrew the green
bottle cap"
"Pick up the watermelon
to eat"
Household
"Use the toothpick for 
tooth picking"
"Fasten the documents
with the stapler"
Tool
"Hold the megaphone
to speak"
"Perform drilling with 
the power drill"
Electronics
"Plug the mouse into the 
computer"
"Retrieve the network
cable from the shelf"
Textiles
"Place the hot water bag
around the neck"
"Take the bucket hat
for wearing"
Toy
"Place the LinaBell on a
shelf for display"
"Hand the Labubu to the
child for play"
Fig. 14: Real-world language-guided dexterous functional grasping in static cluttered scenes. Representative grasping
results are presented across six everyday object categories: food, household items, tools, toys, electronics, and textiles.
B. Experiments of Language-Guided Functional Grasping in
Static Cluttered Scenes
1) Task Description: In this task, we evaluate the system’s
ability to perform language-guided functional grasping in
dense clutter using the ROHand on both the XMAN-R1 and
TianJi Marvin platforms. For each of the 102 target objects,
we construct a cluttered scene containing one target object
associated with a specific functional instruction, 2–3 distractors
with similar semantic categories or visual appearances, and
additional background objects. We conduct five trials for each
object under randomized object poses and scene configurations,
yielding 510 grasping trials in total. We report the category-level
and overall success rates aggregated from the two platforms.
2) Experimental Results: As shown in Fig. 14, by composing
the spatial and cognitive priors, AdaRoboVLG can generate
spatially feasible and functionally appropriate dexterous grasp
poses in cluttered scenes. When the target object is surrounded
by cluttered or occluding objects (e.g., a watermelon and a
toothpick box), our method can still reliably plan collision-
free grasps. For tools or daily items with explicit functional
affordances (e.g., a bottle, a megaphone, and a power drill), it
selects task-relevant functional parts and grasp types, producing
grasps consistent with human object-use behaviors. As illus-
trated in Fig. 15a, AdaRoboVLG achieves an overall success
rate of 83.3% across 510 real-world grasping trials. These
results demonstrate that the system can reliably perform target
identification, functional grasp intent inference, and dexterous
grasp generation in real-world clutter.
We further summarize the distribution of failure modes
in Fig. 15b. Functional-part recognition errors constitute the
Object Category
0
20
40
60
80
100
Success Rate (%)
Food
Tool
Toy
Textiles
Household
Electronics
Overall
(a) Category success rates.
11.8%
22.3%
29.4%
G
r
a
s
p
-
T
y
p
e
F
u
n
ct
io
n
al
-
P
a
rt
 
R
e
c
o
g
n
it
io
n
 
E
r
r
o
r
t
c
e
j
b
o
-i
tl
u
M
E
r
r
o
r
t
n
e
i
c
if
f
u
s
n
I
y
ti
li
b
a
t
S
 t
c
a
t
n
o
C
G
r
a
s
p 
P
o
s
e
E
s
ti
m
a
ti
o
n
 
E
r
r
o
r
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
r
e
t
n
I
20.0%
16.5%
(b) Failure distributions.
Fig. 15: Quantitative analysis for language-guided dexterous
functional grasping in cluttered scenes. The results summa-
rize (a) category-level and overall success rates and (b) failure
distributions of unsuccessful trials.
primary source of failure, accounting for 29.4% of unsuc-
cessful trials. These failures mainly occur when the target
object’s functional regions are ambiguous or visually similar
to distractors, leading to incorrect functional part localization.
Grasp pose estimation errors account for 22.3%, primarily
caused by inaccurate pose estimation or unstable candidate
selection under geometric uncertainties. Insufficient contact
stability represents 20.0% of failures, frequently occurring
with small or smooth-surfaced objects where the generated
grasps fail to maintain reliable contact after lifting. Multi-
object interference contributes 16.5% of failures, where the
dexterous hand unintentionally grasps multiple objects in dense
clutter. The remaining 11.8% are attributed to grasp-type errors,


16
"Hold the mug to collect
water"
"Use the hair dryer to
dry hair"
"Clean the pan with the
scrub brush"
"Use the peeler to
peel vegetables"
"Lift the lid to open the pot"
"Pick up the spoon to
scoop food"
Fig. 16: Real-world deployment with different end-effectors.
AdaRoboVLG performs language-guided functional grasping
in cluttered scenes with both a parallel-jaw gripper and the
ROHand dexterous hand on the TianJi Marvin platform.
(a)
"Shake red potato chip
can to settle contents"
"Handover the blue
bottle to me"
(b)
(d)
"Pour water into the
bowl with the kettle"
(c)
"Use the mug to collect
water"
Fig. 17: Real-world language-guided dexterous functional
grasping in dynamic cluttered scenes. AdaRoboVLG per-
forms functional grasping on a moving conveyor belt.
which occur when the selected grasp type does not fully match
the object’s functional requirements.
Additionally, as shown in Fig. 16, AdaRoboVLG performs
language-guided functional grasping in cluttered scenes on the
TianJi Marvin platform equipped with a parallel-jaw gripper.
This evaluation demonstrates that the framework can be readily
transferred between different end-effectors.
C. Experiments of Language-Guided Functional Grasping in
Dynamic Cluttered Scenes
1) Task Description: This experiment evaluates the ability
of the system to perform language-guided functional grasping
in dynamic cluttered scenes. It provides a real-world validation
of the composability of spatial, cognitive, and temporal priors
for handling complex grasping scenarios. The experiment is
conducted using the AgileX Piper equipped with a dexterous
hand. We select 16 representative objects and place them
together with distractors on a moving conveyor belt operating
TABLE V: Quantitative evaluation of dynamic grasping.
We report the number of successful trials over total trials under
different human-induced disturbances. N/A indicates that the
test is not applicable due to rotational symmetry.
Object
Out-of-view
Recovery
Fast
Motion
Continuous
Occlusion
Trans.
& Rot.
Success
Rate
Green Bottle
5/5
4/5
5/5
4/5
90.0%
Mango
5/5
4/5
5/5
4/5
90.0%
Toothpaste
5/5
4/5
5/5
4/5
90.0%
Sponge
5/5
5/5
5/5
4/5
95.0%
Red Toy Car
5/5
5/5
5/5
3/5
90.0%
Tennis Ball
5/5
4/5
5/5
N/A
93.3%
Remote Control
5/5
5/5
4/5
4/5
90.0%
Small Fan
5/5
5/5
5/5
4/5
95.0%
Hairband
4/5
4/5
4/5
3/5
75.0%
White Gauze
4/5
5/5
5/5
4/5
90.0%
All
48/50
45/50
48/50
34/45
89.7%
"Use the white gauze 
for bandaging"
(a)
initialization
move and rotate the target object
(d)
"Turn on the small fan to circulate air"
tracking success
(c)
"Hand the red toy car to the child for play"
initialization
occlude the top of the target object and move it
tracking success
tracking drift
"Pick up the sponge for dishwashing"
(b)
initialization
move the target object quickly
tracking success
tracking recovery
initialization
move the target
out of the view
tracking failure
move the target
back into view
tracking success
(failure recovery)
(a)
"Use the white gauze for bandaging"
Out-of-view Recovery
Fast Movement
Continuous Occlusion
Simultaneous Translation and Rotation
Fig. 18: Dynamic grasping under different human-induced
disturbances. Each row presents the continuous tracking and
grasping process under a specific language instruction.
at a speed of 2 cm/s to 5 cm/s. Furthermore, to quantitatively
evaluate tracking robustness, we equip the same manipulator
with a parallel-jaw gripper. We introduce four types of human-
induced disturbances, including out-of-view recovery, fast
movement, continuous occlusion, and simultaneous translation
and rotation. For each disturbance condition, we select 10
objects and perform five repeated grasping trials, reporting the
average success rate across all conditions.
2) Experimental Results: As illustrated in Fig. 17, our
proposed framework demonstrates reliable language-guided
functional grasping in dynamic cluttered conveyor-belt scenar-
ios while updating grasp poses online at 5 Hz. For example, in
Fig. 17c, given the instruction, the spatial prior constrains grasp
generation to avoid collisions with adjacent distractors, while
the cognitive prior selects the cup handle as the appropriate
functional part and determines Prismatic 3 Finger as the task-
suitable grasp type. The base grasp policy then produces
stable and executable grasp poses for the dexterous hand.
The temporal prior further enables the system to robustly
track the target as it moves along the conveyor belt. These


17
"Handover the transparent bottle to me"
(b)
w/ Depth Completion
w/o Depth Completion
(a)
Bimanual
Sorting
Fig. 19: Extensibility demonstrations of AdaRoboVLG. We
demonstrate two representative extensions: (a) bimanual sorting
and (b) transparent-object grasping.
results demonstrate the effectiveness of composing the spatial,
cognitive, and temporal priors for real-world dynamic grasping.
Furthermore, as reported in Tab. V, the system achieves an
average grasping success rate of 89.7% under various human-
induced disturbances (see Fig. 18). Under perturbations such as
fast motion, continuous occlusion, simultaneous translation and
rotation, the temporal tracking module maintains target feature
consistency and continuously updates grasp poses. Notably,
even in out-of-view recovery tests, the system rapidly restores
object pose estimation and grasp planning, further verifying
its robustness in non-static real-world environments.
D. Extensibility of the Adaptive Framework
We further demonstrate that our framework can be extended
to new challenging grasping scenarios by integrating additional
task-relevant modules. As illustrated in Fig. 19, incorporating
a task-allocation module enables AdaRoboVLG to perform
bimanual sorting by distributing grasp targets between the two
arms. Similarly, transparent-object grasping is supported by
integrating a depth-completion module (e.g., SwinDRNet [85])
to recover missing object geometry before constructing the
structured grasp interface. This extensibility stems from the
decoupling of task understanding and physical grasp synthesis,
which allows new capabilities to be incorporated through task-
specific modules without requiring an entirely new policy.
VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A. Limitations and Future Directions
Perception under Uncertainty: The foundation-model
priors for constructing, refining, and updating the structured
grasp interface remain sensitive to perceptual uncertainty.
Specifically, depth noise can distort contact geometry and
compromise grasp generation and evaluation, while inconsistent
cross-view grounding can lead to incorrect functional-region
identification. Furthermore, frequent changes in visual obser-
vations can easily induce pose drift and introduce unnecessary
update latency. To address these limitations, future work could
integrate more capable foundation models. Promising directions
include metric reconstruction [86], [87] to improve geometric
accuracy, cross-view correspondence [88], [89] to promote
grounding consistency, and point-tracking methods [90] to
support efficient, low-latency pose estimation.
Closed-loop Physical Interaction: Our base grasp pol-
icy predicts grasp stability from visual geometry but lacks
tactile feedback to verify contact conditions during execu-
tion. Discrepancies between predicted and actual contacts,
including insufficient contact forces or incipient slip, may
therefore remain undetected, limiting grasp robustness for
small or smooth objects. Incorporating tactile feedback [91]
could complement geometric predictions with direct contact
measurements, supporting closed-loop stability assessment and
corrective in-hand adjustments.
Beyond Single-step Grasping: Our framework synthesizes
task-consistent grasps but does not explicitly account for
dependencies between grasping and other manipulation actions.
In heavily cluttered scenes, preparatory actions may be needed
to expose the target, while subsequent manipulation may
impose additional constraints on grasp selection. Integrating
non-prehensile skills [92] with sequential task planning could
support scene rearrangement before grasping and coordinate
grasp selection with subsequent actions.
B. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce AdaRoboVLG, a task-adaptive
VLG framework that supports deployment across different
robotic hands. It learns an efficient and generalizable base
policy for cross-hand grasp synthesis while offloading task-
dependent understanding to specialized foundation-model mod-
ules. These modules leverage composable priors to convert task
contexts into a structured grasp interface, allowing the base
policy to generate task-consistent and physically feasible grasp
poses. Extensive simulation and real-world experiments demon-
strate that AdaRoboVLG successfully synthesizes grasps across
two- to five-finger end-effectors, while effectively incorporating
spatial, cognitive, and temporal priors to adapt to diverse
grasping tasks under combined contextual conditions (e.g.,
cluttered scenes, functional requirements, and dynamic interac-
tions). By establishing a stable interface between high-level task
understanding and low-level grasp execution, AdaRoboVLG
provides a scalable path for challenging grasping scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Liu, Z. Zhang, Z. Jiao, Z. Zhang, M. Li, C. Jiang, Y. Zhu, and S.-C.
Zhu, “A reconfigurable data glove for reconstructing physical and virtual
grasps,” Engineering, vol. 32, pp. 202–216, 2024.
[2] Y. Zhu, T. Gao, L. Fan, S. Huang, M. Edmonds, H. Liu, F. Gao, C. Zhang,
S. Qi, Y. N. Wu et al., “Dark, beyond deep: A paradigm shift to cognitive
ai with humanlike common sense,” Engineering, vol. 6, pp. 310–345,
2020.
[3] M. Wilson, “Six views of embodied cognition,” Psychonomic bulletin &
review, vol. 9, pp. 625–636, 2002.
[4] M. Goodale and D. Milner, Sight unseen: An exploration of conscious
and unconscious vision.
OUP Oxford, 2013.
[5] E. Thelen and L. B. Smith, A dynamic systems approach to the
development of cognition and action.
MIT press, 1994.
[6] M. Oquab, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, H. Vo, M. Szafraniec, V. Khalidov,
P. Fernandez, D. Haziza, F. Massa, A. El-Nouby et al., “Dinov2:
Learning robust visual features without supervision,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.


18
[7] O. Siméoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, C. Jose,
V. Khalidov, M. Szafraniec, S. Yi, M. Ramamonjisoa et al., “Dinov3,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104, 2025.
[8] S. Chen, X. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Li, G. Yu, H. Fei, H. Zhu, J. Fan,
and T. Chen, “Ll3da: Visual interactive instruction tuning for omni-3d
understanding reasoning and planning,” in Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp. 26 428–26 438.
[9] C. H. Song, V. Blukis, J. Tremblay, S. Tyree, Y. Su, and S. Birchfield,
“Robospatial: Teaching spatial understanding to 2d and 3d vision-language
models for robotics,” in Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2025, pp. 15 768–15 780.
[10] Y. Ji, H. Tan, J. Shi, X. Hao, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, P. Wang, M. Zhao,
Y. Mu, P. An et al., “Robobrain: A unified brain model for robotic
manipulation from abstract to concrete,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.21257,
2025.
[11] B. R. Team, M. Cao, H. Tan, Y. Ji, X. Chen, M. Lin, Z. Li, Z. Cao,
P. Wang, E. Zhou et al., “Robobrain 2.0 technical report,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.02029, 2025.
[12] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai,
L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter et al., “π0: A vision-language-action
flow model for general robot control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164,
2024.
[13] P. Intelligence, K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess,
A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai et al., “π0.5: A vision-
language-action model with open-world generalization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.16054, 2025.
[14] S. Deng, M. Yan, S. Wei, H. Ma, Y. Yang, J. Chen, Z. Zhang,
T. Yang, X. Zhang, H. Cui et al., “Graspvla: a grasping foundation
model pre-trained on billion-scale synthetic action data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.03233, 2025.
[15] Y. Zhong, X. Huang, R. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, Y. Yang, and Y. Chen,
“Dexgraspvla: A vision-language-action framework towards general
dexterous grasping,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20900, 2025.
[16] J. He, D. Li, X. Yu, Z. Qi, W. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang,
L. Yi, and H. Wang, “Dexvlg: Dexterous vision-language-grasp model
at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02747, 2025.
[17] H. Luo, Y. Feng, W. Zhang, S. Zheng, Y. Wang, H. Yuan, J. Liu, C. Xu,
Q. Jin, and Z. Lu, “Being-h0: Vision-language-action pretraining from
large-scale human videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15597, 2025.
[18] L. Zhang, D. Zheng, K. Bai, Z. Bing, Z.-C. Marton, Z. Chen, A. C. Knoll,
and J. Zhang, “Omnidexvlg: Learning dexterous grasp generation from
vision language model-guided grasp semantics, taxonomy and functional
affordance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03874, 2025.
[19] M. Choi, G. Kim, J. Kim, T. Kim, T. Ha, J. Lim, and H. Joo, “Autodex:
An automated real-world system for dexterous grasping data collection,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.23689, 2026.
[20] M. Sundermeyer, A. Mousavian, R. Triebel, and D. Fox, “Contact-
graspnet: Efficient 6-dof grasp generation in cluttered scenes,” in
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2021, pp.
13 438–13 444.
[21] T. Feix, J. Romero, H.-B. Schmiedmayer, A. M. Dollar, and D. Kragic,
“The grasp taxonomy of human grasp types,” Transactions on human-
machine systems (THMS), vol. 46, pp. 66–77, 2015.
[22] H. Dai, A. Majumdar, and R. Tedrake, “Synthesis and optimization
of force closure grasps via sequential semidefinite programming,” in
Robotics Research, vol. 2, 2015, pp. 285–305.
[23] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal,
H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rocktäschel et al., “Retrieval-
augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 9459–9474,
2020.
[24] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le,
D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), pp. 24 824–24 837, 2022.
[25] N. Carion, L. Gustafson, Y.-T. Hu, S. Debnath, R. Hu, D. Suris, C. Ryali,
K. V. Alwala, H. Khedr, A. Huang et al., “Sam 3: Segment anything
with concepts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719, 2025.
[26] J. Zhang, H. Liu, D. Li, X. Yu, H. Geng, Y. Ding, J. Chen, and H. Wang,
“Dexgraspnet 2.0: Learning generative dexterous grasping in large-scale
synthetic cluttered scenes,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL),
2024, pp. 5106–5133.
[27] S. Back, J. Lee, K. Kim, H. Rho, G. Lee, R. Kang, S. Lee, S. Noh,
Y. Lee, T. Lee et al., “Graspclutter6d: A large-scale real-world dataset
for robust perception and grasping in cluttered scenes,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.06866, 2025.
[28] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, M. Gou, and C. Lu, “Graspnet-1billion: A large-
scale benchmark for general object grasping,” in Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 11 441–11 450.
[29] C. Tang, D. Huang, W. Ge, W. Liu, and H. Zhang, “Graspgpt: Leveraging
semantic knowledge from a large language model for task-oriented
grasping,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L), vol. 8, pp.
7551–7558, 2023.
[30] W. Yuan, J. Duan, V. Blukis, W. Pumacay, R. Krishna, A. Murali,
A. Mousavian, and D. Fox, “Robopoint: A vision-language model for spa-
tial affordance prediction for robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10721,
2024.
[31] Y. Tang, S. Zhang, X. Hao, P. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wang, and S. Zhang,
“Affordgrasp: In-context affordance reasoning for open-vocabulary task-
oriented grasping in clutter,” in International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2025, pp. 9433–9439.
[32] Z. Zhao, J. Gao, and D. Zheng, “Affordance-guided robotic grasping via
multimodal large language model reasoning,” Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering (TASE), vol. 23, pp. 4088–4100, 2026.
[33] M. Ji, R.-Z. Qiu, X. Zou, and X. Wang, “Graspsplats: Efficient
manipulation with 3d feature splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02084,
2024.
[34] Y. Zheng, X. Chen, Y. Zheng, S. Gu, R. Yang, B. Jin, P. Li, C. Zhong,
Z. Wang, L. Liu et al., “Gaussiangrasper: 3d language gaussian splatting
for open-vocabulary robotic grasping,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters (RA-L), vol. 9, pp. 7827–7834, 2024.
[35] Y. Qian, X. Zhu, O. Biza, S. Jiang, L. Zhao, H. Huang, Y. Qi, and R. Platt,
“Thinkgrasp: A vision-language system for strategic part grasping in
clutter,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11298, 2024.
[36] H. Liu, S. Guo, P. Mai, J. Cao, H. Li, and J. Ma, “Robodexvlm: Visual
language model-enabled task planning and motion control for dexterous
robot manipulation,” in International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2025, pp. 1381–1388.
[37] R. Mirjalili, M. Krawez, S. Silenzi, Y. Blei, and W. Burgard, “Lan-
grasp: Using large language models for semantic object grasping,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.05239, 2023.
[38] Z. Li, J. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Dong, T. Teng, Y. Ou, D. G. Caldwell, and F. Chen,
“Language-guided dexterous functional grasping by LLM generated grasp
functionality and synergy for humanoid manipulation,” Transactions on
Automation Science and Engineering (TASE), vol. 22, pp. 10 506–10 519,
2025.
[39] Z. Xu, B. Qi, S. Agrawal, and S. Song, “Adagrasp: Learning an adaptive
gripper-aware grasping policy,” in International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2021, pp. 4620–4626.
[40] Y. Xu, W. Wan, J. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Shan, H. Shen, R. Wang, H. Geng,
Y. Weng, J. Chen et al., “Unidexgrasp: Universal robotic dexterous
grasping via learning diverse proposal generation and goal-conditioned
policy,” in Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2023, pp. 4737–4746.
[41] W. Xu, W. Guo, X. Shi, X. Sheng, and X. Zhu, “Fast force-closure grasp
synthesis with learning-based sampling,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters (RA-L), vol. 8, pp. 4275–4282, 2023.
[42] W. Wan, H. Geng, Y. Liu, Z. Shan, Y. Yang, L. Yi, and H. Wang,
“Unidexgrasp++: Improving dexterous grasping policy learning via
geometry-aware curriculum and iterative generalist-specialist learning,”
in International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023, pp. 3891–
3902.
[43] Z. Chen, Q. Yan, Y. Chen, T. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Ding, J. Li, Y. Yang, and
H. Dong, “Clutterdexgrasp: A sim-to-real system for general dexterous
grasping in cluttered scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14317, 2025.
[44] J. Varley, J. Weisz, J. Weiss, and P. Allen, “Generating multi-fingered
robotic grasps via deep learning,” in International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015, pp. 4415–4420.
[45] P. Li, T. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Geng, Y. Zhu, Y. Yang, and S. Huang, “Gendex-
grasp: Generalizable dexterous grasping,” in International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023, pp. 8068–8074.
[46] L. Shao, F. Ferreira, M. Jorda, V. Nambiar, J. Luo, E. Solowjow, J. A.
Ojea, O. Khatib, and J. Bohg, “Unigrasp: Learning a unified model to
grasp with multifingered robotic hands,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters (RA-L), vol. 5, pp. 2286–2293, 2020.
[47] Z. Wu, R. A. Potamias, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Deng, and S. Luo, “Cedex:
Cross-embodiment dexterous grasp generation at scale from human-like
contact representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24661, 2025.
[48] A. Wu, M. Guo, and C. K. Liu, “Learning diverse and physically feasible
dexterous grasps with generative model and bilevel optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.00195, 2022.


19
[49] Q. She, R. Hu, J. Xu, M. Liu, K. Xu, and H. Huang, “Learning high-
dof reaching-and-grasping via dynamic representation of gripper-object
interaction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13998, 2022.
[50] Z. Wei, Z. Xu, J. Guo, Y. Hou, C. Gao, Z. Cai, J. Luo, and L. Shao,
“D(R, O) grasp: A unified representation of robot and object interaction
for cross-embodiment dexterous grasping,” in International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2025, pp. 4982–4988.
[51] X. Fei, Z. Xu, H. Fang, T. Zhang, and L. Shao, “T (r, o) grasp:
Efficient graph diffusion of robot-object spatial transformation for cross-
embodiment dexterous grasping,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12724, 2025.
[52] Y. Li, W. Wei, D. Li, P. Wang, W. Li, and J. Zhong, “Hgc-net: Deep
anthropomorphic hand grasping in clutter,” in International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2022, pp. 714–720.
[53] J. Zhang, Z. Ma, T. Wu, Z. Chen, and H. Dong, “Cadgrasp: Learning
contact and collision aware general dexterous grasping in cluttered scenes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.15039, 2026.
[54] R. Firoozi, J. Tucker, S. Tian, A. Majumdar, J. Sun, W. Liu, Y. Zhu,
S. Song, A. Kapoor, K. Hausman et al., “Foundation models in robotics:
Applications, challenges, and the future,” International Journal of
Robotics Research (IJRR), vol. 44, pp. 701–739, 2025.
[55] N. Ravi, V. Gabeur, Y.-T. Hu, R. Hu, C. Ryali, T. Ma, H. Khedr, R. Rädle,
C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, E. Mintun, J. Pan, K. V. Alwala, N. Carion,
C.-Y. Wu, R. Girshick, P. Dollár, and C. Feichtenhofer, “Sam 2: Segment
anything in images and videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024.
[56] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat et al., “Gpt-4
technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[57] S. Bai, K. Chen, X. Liu, J. Wang, W. Ge, S. Song, K. Dang, P. Wang,
S. Wang, J. Tang et al., “Qwen2. 5-vl technical report,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.13923, 2025.
[58] Y. Li, K. Xiong, X. Guo, F. Li, S. Yan, G. Xu, L. Zhou, L. Chen,
H. Sun, B. Wang et al., “Recogdrive: A reinforced cognitive framework
for end-to-end autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08052,
2025.
[59] Y. Li, L. Zhou, S. Yan, B. Liao, T. Yan, K. Xiong, L. Chen, H. Xie,
B. Wang, G. Chen et al., “Unidrivevla: Unifying understanding, per-
ception, and action planning for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.02190, 2026.
[60] W. Huang, C. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wu, and L. Fei-Fei, “Voxposer:
Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.
[61] W. Huang, C. Wang, Y. Li, R. Zhang, and L. Fei-Fei, “Rekep:
Spatio-temporal reasoning of relational keypoint constraints for robotic
manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01652, 2024.
[62] C. Yuan, S. Joshi, S. Zhu, H. Su, H. Zhao, and Y. Gao, “Roboengine:
Plug-and-play robot data augmentation with semantic robot segmentation
and background generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18738, 2025.
[63] Y. Mei, J. Sun, Z. Peng, F. Deng, G. Wang, and J. Chen, “Rog-sam: A
language-driven framework for instance-level robotic grasping detection,”
Transactions on Multimedia (TMM), vol. 27, pp. 3057–3068, 2025.
[64] S. Liu, L. Wu, B. Li, H. Tan, H. Chen, Z. Wang, K. Xu, H. Su, and
J. Zhu, “Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864, 2024.
[65] X. Wu, L. Jiang, P.-S. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Qiao, W. Ouyang,
T. He, and H. Zhao, “Point transformer v3: Simpler, faster, stronger,” in
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024,
pp. 4840–4851.
[66] T. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Jiao, Y. Zhu, and S.-C. Zhu, “Synthesizing diverse and
physically stable grasps with arbitrary hand structures using differentiable
force closure estimator,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L),
vol. 7, pp. 470–477, 2021.
[67] R. Meattini, R. Suárez, G. Palli, and C. Melchiorri, “Human to robot
hand motion mapping methods: Review and classification,” Transactions
on Robotics (T-RO), vol. 39, pp. 842–861, 2023.
[68] J. Chen, Y. Ke, L. Peng, and H. Wang, “Dexonomy: Synthesizing all dex-
terous grasp types in a grasp taxonomy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18829,
2025.
[69] H. Yan, H. Fang, and C. Lu, “Dexterous manipulation based on prior
dexterous grasp pose knowledge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15587,
2024.
[70] H. Yan, H.-S. Fang, and C. Lu, “A surprisingly efficient representation
for multi-finger grasping,” in International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2024, pp. 6462–6469.
[71] H.-S. Fang, H. Yan, Z. Tang, H. Fang, C. Wang, and C. Lu, “Anydexgrasp:
General dexterous grasping for different hands with human-level learning
efficiency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16420, 2025.
[72] M. Santello, M. Flanders, and J. F. Soechting, “Postural hand synergies
for tool use,” Journal of neuroscience, vol. 18, pp. 10 105–10 115, 1998.
[73] C. R. Mason, J. E. Gomez, and T. J. Ebner, “Hand synergies during
reach-to-grasp,” Journal of neurophysiology, vol. 86, pp. 2896–2910,
2001.
[74] N. Jarque-Bou, V. Gracia-Ibáñez, J.-L. Sancho-Bru, M. Vergara, A. Pérez-
González, and F. Andrés, “Using kinematic reduction for studying
grasping postures. an application to power and precision grasp of
cylinders,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 56, pp. 52–61, 2016.
[75] S. Coumar, G. Chang, N. Kodkani, and Z. Kingston, “Foam: A
tool for spherical approximation of robot geometry,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.13704, 2025.
[76] Y. Wang, M. Zhang, Z. Li, T. Kelestemur, K. Driggs-Campbell, J. Wu,
L. Fei-Fei, and Y. Li, “D3fields: Dynamic 3d descriptor fields for zero-
shot generalizable rearrangement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16118,
2023.
[77] C. Tang, D. Huang, W. Dong, R. Xu, and H. Zhang, “Foundationgrasp:
Generalizable task-oriented grasping with foundation models,” Trans-
actions on Automation Science and Engineering (TASE), vol. 22, pp.
12 418–12 435, 2025.
[78] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, H. Fang, M. Gou, J. Liu, H. Yan, W. Liu, Y. Xie,
and C. Lu, “Anygrasp: Robust and efficient grasp perception in spatial
and temporal domains,” Transactions on Robotics (T-RO), vol. 39, pp.
3929–3945, 2023.
[79] B. Wen and K. E. Bekris, “Bundletrack: 6d pose tracking for novel
objects without instance or category-level 3d models,” in International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2021, pp. 8067–
8074.
[80] J. Liu, R. Zhang, H. Fang, M. Gou, H. Fang, C. Wang, S. Xu, H. Yan,
and C. Lu, “Target-referenced reactive grasping for dynamic objects,” in
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023,
pp. 8824–8833.
[81] N. Chen, X. Wu, G. Xu, J. Jiang, Z. Chen, and W. Zheng, “Motiongrasp:
Long-term grasp motion tracking for dynamic grasping,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters (RA-L), vol. 10, pp. 796–803, 2025.
[82] K. Xu, X. Xia, K. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Mao, B. Deng, J. Ye, R. Xiong, and
Y. Wang, “Efficient alignment of unconditioned action prior for language-
conditioned pick and place in clutter,” Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering (TASE), vol. 22, pp. 21 256–21 268, 2025.
[83] R. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Xu, P. Li, T. Liu, and H. Wang,
“Dexgraspnet: A large-scale robotic dexterous grasp dataset for general
objects based on simulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02697, 2022.
[84] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[85] Q. Dai, J. Zhang, Q. Li, T. Wu, H. Dong, Z. Liu, P. Tan, and H. Wang,
“Domain randomization-enhanced depth simulation and restoration for
perceiving and grasping specular and transparent objects,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022, pp. 374–391.
[86] H. Zhou, S. Liu, Y. He, B. Zhang, F. Fu, C. Hou, X. Hou, L. Han, and
W. Sui, “X-lens: Real-time metric depth estimation with heterogeneous
cameras,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.12993, 2026.
[87] S. Yang, L. Xu, H. Li, J. Mu, J. Zeng, D. Lin, and J. Pang, “Robo3r:
Enhancing robotic manipulation with accurate feed-forward 3d recon-
struction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10101, 2026.
[88] Y. Cao, F. Wu, D. Z. Chen, Y. Zhong, L. Hong, and D. Xu, “Vggt-det:
Mining vggt internal priors for sensor-geometry-free multi-view indoor
3d object detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.00912, 2026.
[89] J. Pan, R. Wang, T. Qian, M. Mahdi, Y. Fu, X. Xue, X. Huang,
L. Van Gool, D. P. Paudel, and Y. Fu, “Vˆ 2-sam: Marrying sam2
with multi-prompt experts for cross-view object correspondence,” in
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2026,
pp. 16 910–16 919.
[90] T.-Y. Lin, H. J. Lee, K. Doherty, Y. Lee, and S. Kim, “Point2pose:
Occlusion-recovering 6d pose tracking and 3d reconstruction for multiple
unknown objects via 2d point trackers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10415,
2026.
[91] Z. Zhao, W. Li, Y. Li, T. Liu, B. Li, M. Wang, K. Du, H. Liu, Y. Zhu,
Q. Wang et al., “Embedding high-resolution touch across robotic hands
enables adaptive human-like grasping,” Nature Machine Intelligence,
vol. 7, pp. 889–900, 2025.
[92] L. Pei, H. Yuzhe, L. Wanlin, X. Chenxi, and J. Ziyuan, “Dexmove:
Learning tactile-guided non-prehensile manipulation with dexterous
hands,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2026.
