Revisiting Open-Loop Execution in Robotics:
Toward Reactive, Higher-Performing Policies
Michael Zeng1,∗
Abhinav Agarwal1
Ajay Bati3
Brian Lee1
Siddharth Ancha2
Russ Tedrake1
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2University of California, Berkeley
3Mundane Systems Inc.
∗Corresponding author: michaelszeng@gmail.com
https://revisiting-open-loop-action-chunking.github.io/
Abstract: Action chunking — the practice of predicting a sequence of actions and executing a prefix
open-loop — has emerged as a key enabler of recent progress in imitation learning for robotic ma-
nipulation. However, executing long open-loop prefixes reduces reactivity, limiting policies’ ability
to correct for errors. Further, the mechanisms underlying these performance benefits remain poorly
understood: prior works cite mitigating compounding errors, absorbing inference latency, or smooth-
ing motions, but provide limited controlled evidence or guidance for preserving reactivity. In this
work, we argue that long open-loop execution primarily helps short-context policies imitate “non-
Markovian demonstrations”. Across four simulation and two real-world tasks, we show that expert
non-Markovianity strongly shapes the relationship between task success and open-loop execution
horizon. Further, we investigate the impact of compounding errors — the prevailing explanation for
long open-loop execution in prior work — and find that while they matter, expert non-Markovianity
has a much stronger impact in our experimental setting. Finally, we show that when policies are
provided with a sufficiently long context, open-loop execution is no longer beneficial and the most
reactive, closed-loop policies perform best. While imitation learning has seen great success using
long open-loop execution, our findings motivate long-context, reactive policies as a more principled
and performant paradigm.
Keywords: Action Chunking, Imitation Learning, Diffusion Policy, Reactive Control
1
Introduction
Imitation learning has recently seen rapid adoption in robotic manipulation, driven by its success on complex, contact-
rich, and long-horizon tasks. A key enabler of this progress has been action chunking — the practice of predicting
a sequence, or “chunk,” of actions and executing a fixed-length prefix open-loop before replanning from new obser-
vations. We term the length of this prefix the execution horizon. Popularized by ACT [1] and Diffusion Policy [2],
long execution horizons are now used broadly across imitation learning in both academia [1–7] and industry [8–12].
State-of-the-art works use open-loop execution horizons as long as 0.5 – 1 seconds [2].
However, using long execution horizons comes at a cost: by executing longer open-loop segments and incorporating
new observations less often, it reduces policy reactivity — the frequency at which the policy adjusts its behavior in
response to execution errors or unexpected environmental changes. We argue that reactivity has received comparatively
little attention in the literature; yet, even in relatively static environments, we find uncertain dynamics and high-
precision requirements make frequent re-planning desirable. Further, as manipulation advances from slow, quasi-
static two-finger tasks toward fast, dexterous, and dynamic contact-rich interaction, reactivity will only become more
important. Human-level dexterity will ultimately require human-level reactivity.
This motivates the question: why do long execution horizons appear so necessary? In particular, even at a fixed
prediction horizon, we ask why longer execution horizons still improve performance. Current justifications center
around reducing the effective horizon of tasks to mitigate compounding errors [1, 13], improving temporal consistency
of actions to reduce unsmooth motions [1, 2], or as a mechanism to absorb delay from policy inference or other variable
latencies [2]. However, these explanations have not been evaluated through extensive, controlled experimentation.
arXiv:2608.15938v2  [cs.RO]  19 Aug 2026


Moreover, existing justifications explain why long execution horizons are beneficial but provide little guidance on how
practitioners can preserve policy reactivity.
An important fact about widely deployed imitation learning policies is that they use very short context lengths, often
just the most recent 1 or 2 frames [1, 2, 9, 10, 14, 15]. This can be insufficient when behavior cloning from human
demonstrations: human experts may use implicit memory and additional information unavailable to the robot when
selecting actions, making them non-Markovian with respect to the policy’s observations. The central claim in this
work is that long execution horizons primarily compensate for policies’ limited context lengths when trained
to imitate non-Markovian experts. We present a systematic empirical investigation of this claim across diverse
tasks. We then show that increasing policy context length is an effective way to preserve reactivity while increasing
task performance. Importantly, our findings do not argue against action-sequence prediction; rather, they suggest that
open-loop long-sequence execution may not be needed.
Our key contributions are:
1. We show that non-Markovianity of the expert demonstrator is a key reason long execution horizons are
necessary for short-context policies.
2. We directly compare expert non-Markovianity with compounding errors and find that, while compound-
ing errors matter, expert non-Markovianity has a stronger influence on the optimal execution horizon than
compounding errors in practice.
3. We show that increasing context length reduces reliance on long execution horizons; sufficiently long context
removes the benefit of long execution horizons entirely; and increasing context length presents a promising
direction for training highly reactive policies that achieve higher task performance.
Beyond these findings, we also introduce a simple double encoder architecture that improves long-context learning,
and publicly release code for the automated Markovian and non-Markovian expert policies used in Sec. 4, supporting
future studies on long-context imitation learning and the effects of expert properties.
In Sec. 4.1, we show that non-Markovian expert demonstrations combined with insufficient policy context length are
a key reason policies benefit from long execution horizons.
In Sec. 4.2, we address compounding errors as a possible explanation for using long execution horizons and compare
their influence with that of expert non-Markovianity.
In Sec. 5, we show that increasing context length can fully eliminate the benefit of long execution horizons and produce
policies that are more performant than their short-context, long-execution horizon counterparts.
In Sec. 6, we conclude with discussions about the role of memory and reactivity in robotic manipulation and propose
future research directions.
2
Related Works
Action chunking in robotics: Action chunking (in particular, using long execution horizons) was popularized in
modern robotic imitation learning by ACT [1] and Diffusion Policy [2], which, at the time, produced breakthroughs in
manipulation capabilities. Since then, using long execution horizons has become common across tabletop and mobile
manipulation [16], for both specialist [8, 16, 17] and generalist robot policies [3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 14], and for models of all
types, including flow/diffusion [2, 9, 10], variational latent-variable models [1], autoregressive [18], and more.
Across the field, the recurring empirical pattern is that performance is often non-monotonic in the execution horizon:
very short horizons underperform, intermediate horizons perform best, and very long horizons degrade performance by
reducing closed-loop reactivity [1, 2]. In this work, we explore this relationship between task success and execution
horizon (which we call the success-horizon curve) and study the factors that determine its shape. We note that
intentionally using long execution horizons is largely unique to imitation learning — in reinforcement learning and
model predictive control, for example, the highest performing robot policies employ the fastest possible closed-loop
planning rate. A priori, it is unclear why short execution horizons in imitation learning perform worst.
Current explanations for the need for open loop execution: A widely stated justification for using long execution
horizons is that, by reducing the frequency at which the policy re-plans, long execution horizons “reduce the effec-
2


tive horizon” of tasks, thus “mitigating compounding errors” [1]. Zhang et al. [13] provide theoretical and empirical
support for this explanation, showing that long execution horizons can remain beneficial even when alternative ex-
planations such as partial observability are controlled for. We test the practical importance of compounding errors
mitigation relative to expert non-Markovianity in Sec. 4.2.
A practical justification for using long execution horizons is that it allows the robot to make continual progress even
during latencies such as those produced by neural network inference [2, 19]. Along a similar line of reasoning, many
works also cite improving “temporal action consistency” [1, 2, 17, 19–22], arguing that inference latency can cause
newly-predicted action chunks to misalign with the previous chunk, and that increasing the execution horizon reduces
the frequency at which chunk transitions occur, thus reducing unsmooth motion. While well-supported, neither ex-
planation explains why long execution horizons are still useful in simulated experiments, where inference latency is
abstracted away due to synchronous stepping of the simulator physics and policy. In this work, we focus on under-
standing why long execution horizons are required even under infinitely fast (zero latency) policies.
Many works have cited elements of history-dependence or partial observability such as “pauses in demonstrations”
[1], “temporally correlated confounders” [1], or “mode commitment” [2], which [23] unifies under the language of
“non-Markovian expert demonstrations”. [23] only argues that chunked prediction, paired with generative modeling,
is necessary to capture non-Markovianity in expert demonstrations, but make no such argument about chunked exe-
cution. Zhang et al. [13] acknowledge chunked execution may be beneficial when imitating non-Markovian experts
(including for imitating pauses) but focus on studying compounding errors in their work, emphasizing a result on the
Robomimic Tool Hang task showing that long execution horizons remain beneficial even under a fully-observable,
deterministic, Markovian expert1. We conduct experiments targeting both expert non-Markovianity and compounding
errors, and conclude that expert non-Markovianity does play a strong role in the need for long execution horizons, and,
in our experimental setting, usually a much stronger role than compounding errors. Concurrent work by Lazzati et al.
[24] similarly explains the benefits of action chunking through improved capacity to imitate non-Markovian experts,
alongside reduced compounding errors and “implicit ensembling.” While they investigate non-Markovianity primarily
through delayed policies, we study it by varying the learner’s context length. These independent analyses strengthen
the case that expert non-Markovianity is a key reason long execution horizons appear necessary.
Temporal consistency and smoothness: Many prior works have proposed increasing temporal consistency between
consecutive action chunks [1, 17, 19, 22], with some works even claiming to reduce reliance on long execution horizons
[20, 21]. There are a variety of ways to do so, including averaging between chunks [1, 17], inference-time search [21],
inference-time guidance [20], or training or inference-time inpainting [19, 22]. In all cases, while increasing temporal
consistency sometimes allows setting shorter chunk lengths, such methods inherently reduce reactivity by binding new
actions to old actions, effectively trading execution horizon for a new “consistency” parameter. Moreover, averaging
across chunks can be harmful under multimodal predictions, as it collapses distinct modes toward their mean.
Variable chunk-length policies: A recent line of work treats the execution horizon itself as adaptive, either by learning
execution-length selectors [25–27], or by using test-time confidence signals to truncate chunks and replan [28]. These
methods can improve performance by trading off the shortcomings of long and short execution horizons at favorable
times, but do not address why short-horizon policies fail in the first place. We target this root cause directly.
Another set of works trains low-frequency chunking base policies with high-frequency reactive heads [29–33]. How-
ever, the reactive heads typically condition on a smaller set of observations and are bound to the outputs of the low-
frequency base policies (i.e. by conditioning on latent action chunks [30] or using a partially denoised output from the
base policy [29]), reducing them to only local refinement. We seek reactivity to even large environment changes that
require full-policy re-planning.
Long-context imitation learning: As our findings show that context length significantly affects the optimal execution
horizon, we review relevant works in the space of long-context imitation learning. Long context lengths are beneficial
for imitation learning policies to capture history-dependencies present in expert data or required by the task, but a
vast majority of imitation-learning policies are memory-less or condition on only a short history (of 1 – 2 frames)
due to the causal confusion problem in long-context learning [34]. Recent work has pursued long-context imitation
learning through two broad directions: directly scaling raw temporal context [35–37], and selectively compressing,
1We find conflicting results in our experiments, but hypothesize that Zhang et al.’s result can be explained by the relatively small
amount of training data used to train their learner (thus inflating compounding error), or by the low success rate (≈70%) of the
expert, causing the induced expert (which filters out the actual expert’s failures) to be non-Markovian. See Sec. 4.2.
3


retrieving, or maintaining task-relevant memory [37–47]. For our experiments, we are interested in the first line of
works because they retain maximum observability for inferring expert hidden state, which is important when imitating
non-Markovian expert demonstrations.
3
Preliminaries
3.1
Imitation learning and Diffusion Policy
In behavior cloning, successful task demonstrations are collected from an expert and used as supervised data to train a
policy that reproduces the expert’s actions. We represent these demonstrations as a dataset of observation-action pairs,
D = (O(i)
t , A(i)
t )
n
i=1, and train a policy πθ(At | Ot) to approximate the expert conditional distribution pE(At | Ot).
Diffusion Policies [2] accomplish this by using a diffusion model to learn the relevant conditional distribution; we
provide additional background on their training and inference in Sec. B.1.
Following [1, 2], modern behavior cloning methods learn to predict a “chunk” of actions At = (at, at+1, . . . , at+Tp−1)
given a short history of observations: Ot = (ot−To+1, . . . , ot) where To denotes the observation horizon or context
length and Tp denotes the prediction horizon. A vast majority of works use short context lengths of To = 1 or 2
[1–4, 6, 7, 9].
These policies typically execute a prefix of the predicted action chunk open-loop before re-querying the policy on new
observations. We let Texec denote the execution horizon: the number of predicted actions executed before re-querying
the policy. We use T ∗
exec for the value of Texec that maximizes task performance.
This work studies the effect of Texec on policy performance given a fixed Tp. In particular, while Texec = 1 is
necessary for closed-loop reactive control, we study why Texec > 1 has generally been deemed necessary for behavior
cloning to succeed.
Strictly speaking, the relevant quantity is the open-loop execution time between successive policy queries. However,
because demonstrations are usually discretized with a fixed time period dt between consecutive actions, this duration
is Texec · dt. In this work, we fix dt and only vary Texec and treat Texec synonymously with execution time.
Throughout our experiments, we use the term success-horizon curve to denote the relationship between policy success
rate and execution horizon (Texec), plotted on a 2D curve, with task, dataset, policy class, and training procedure held
constant. See Fig. 2 for an example.
3.2
Compounding Errors in Imitation Learning
Imitation learning policies are trained on states visited by the expert, but at test time, small policy errors can move
the robot into states that are unlikely under the expert demonstrations. The policy is then forced to act on out-of-
distribution observations, which can lead to further errors that compound over time [48]. This phenomenon is known
as compounding errors and is often used to motivate long execution horizons: executing more actions per policy query
reduces the effective closed-loop decision horizon [1, 49] and, consequently, the severity of compounding errors.
Data aggregation (DAgger [48]) is a standard method for reducing compounding errors: it iteratively rolls out the
learned policy, queries the expert for the correct actions on states actually visited by that policy, aggregates these
newly labeled states into the training dataset, and re-trains, thereby reducing mismatch between the training state
distribution and policy-induced test-time state distribution.
We apply a variant of DAgger called HG-DAgger in Sec. 4.2 as an intervention to test whether long execution horizons
primarily help by mitigating compounding errors.
3.3
Non-Markovian experts
We define a setup similar to Block et al. [23]. For simplicity, we treat the environment observations ot as Markovian
states for the environment.2 The robot accomplishes the task in an environment with Markovian dynamics. That is,
2This approximation is commonly used for algorithmic discussion in robotic behavior cloning [50]. While not exactly true, it is
often reasonable with sufficient camera views.
4


given ot and at, the environment dynamics evolve as p(ot+1 | o≤t, a≤t) = p(ot+1 | ot, at). We define the following
two forms for the expert E providing demonstrations in this environment:
• Markovian Expert:
The expert’s action distribution depends only on the current environment state:
πE(at|o≤t) = πE(at|ot).
• Non-Markovian Expert: The expert’s action distribution depends on both the current and past environment
states: πE(at | o≤t)̸ = πE(at | ot). We qualify experts which maintain a hidden state that carries distilled
information from past observations in this category. For instance, experts providing demonstrations which
require them to keep track of time.
Notably, human experts are inevitably non-Markovian: even when trying not to, they naturally draw on earlier actions
and observations, latent preferences, and other unrecorded information when providing demonstrations.
4
Expert Markovianity Dominates the Success-Horizon Curve
We now demonstrate our first result: the success-horizon curve is strongly influenced by Markovianity of the
expert when training short-context policies.
We compare the success-horizon curves of Diffusion Policies trained on Markovian and non-Markovian expert data
across 4 diverse simulation benchmarks. When the policy architecture, training procedure, and evaluation setting are
fixed, we find that changing only the nature of the expert to Markovian shifts the curve toward near-monotonically de-
creasing with optimal execution horizon T ∗
exec = 1. We then address the compounding errors hypothesis — a common
justification for long execution horizons from prior work — directly and show that, on the FurnitureSimOneLeg task
[51], interventions designed to reduce compounding errors have a much smaller effect on the success-horizon curve
than changing expert Markovianity.
In all experiments in this section, we train image-based Diffusion Policies that use context length To = 2, pre-
diction horizon Tp = 15, and execution horizons Texec ranging from 1 to 15, holding all training and evaluation
parameters constant besides the dataset.3 We choose a variety of types of benchmarks, ranging from high-precision
(FurnitureSimOneLeg, GearInsertion) to highly multimodal (Kitchen) and contact-rich (Push-T). See Fig. 1 for
task descriptions. Importantly, we conduct experiments in the moderate-to-high data regime, training policies
on 200+ demonstrations, depending on the task. We believe experiments in this regime are important to ensure
results transfer to deployment systems, which are increasingly trained on large datasets.
Figure 1: Benchmark Tasks. FurnitureSimOneLeg [51]: pick up table leg and insert and screw into table top to
assemble the table. Push-T [52]: Push T-shaped slider to target pose, then return robot to reset pose. GearInsertion:
Pick up large gear and insert onto gear carrier, meshed with other gears. Kitchen [53]: Complete any 4 kitchen
subtasks (e.g., open microwave, move kettle, turn top/bottom knob, flip switch, open slide door, open hinge door), in
any order; the dataset contains random subtask permutations. All tasks use image-based observations.
For Push-T, we use the ManiSkill simulator [54] for the expert comparisons in Sec. 4.1 (PushT-M) and Drake [55] for
the context-length experiments in Sec. 5 (PushT-D). We distinguish them because simulator physics can materially
affect planar pushing: Drake provides richer hydroelastic contact [56], while ManiSkill’s GPU parallelism makes
training a Markovian RL expert more practical. See Sec. A.1 for details.
3We make an exception for Kitchen; we additionally provide a subtask sequence label to ensure full observability. See Sec. A.2.
5


4.1
Policies Trained on Markovian Expert Demonstrations Exhibit Optimal Execution Horizon T ∗
exec = 1
Firstly, we isolate the effect of expert Markovianity by testing whether replacing non-Markovian demonstrations with
Markovian demonstrations shifts the optimal execution horizon to T ∗
exec = 1.
4.1.1
Experimental Setup
We develop two scripted experts for the FurnitureSimOneLeg task.
1. Deterministic Markovian Expert: This expert is implemented as a finite-state machine (FSM) that determines
its state using the current and previous environment states, and uses end-effector operational-space control
(OSC) and gripper PID control to move the robot toward FSM state-specific waypoints. Note that the Diffusion
Policy conditions on 2 frames of history (To = 2), so a 2-Markovian expert (that conditions on current and
previous environment states) is Markovian with respect to the policy’s input.
2. Non-Markovian Expert: This expert is constructed by injecting a variety of non-Markovian behaviors into
the deterministic Markovian expert, including a hidden latent plan (consisting of episodically pre-determined
waypoint offsets), sticky FSM state transitions (requiring the expert to stay in the current state for a latent number
of steps (up to 16) before advancing), and latent-count alignment maneuvers (repeatedly noising the trajectory
before picking or inserting the leg, for up to 10 timesteps per iteration and 3 iterations). These injections are
designed to mimic human behaviors (e.g. pauses, delay in mentally registering subtask completion, sub-optimal
or cyclic alignment motions).
In addition to these two scripted experts, we also compare a human teleoperator as an inherently non-Markovian
expert.
We evaluate each expert at a variety of execution horizons and plot results in Fig. 2. We repeat the experiment for
PushT-M, GearInsertion, and Kitchen in Fig. 3, plotting the success-horizon curve under Markovian and human
experts. Further experimental details are in Sec. A.2.
Figure 2: Success-horizon curves for Furniture-Sim one-leg. The policy trained on human non-Markovian (NM)
expert data (Left) exhibits the typical inverted U-shape curve; the policy trained on Markovian (M) scripted expert data
(Center) exhibits an approximately monotonically decreasing curve; adding non-Markovian behaviors to the scripted
expert (Right) restores the inverted U-shape.
4.1.2
Results and Discussion
Expert Markovianity changes the success-horizon curve to monotonically decreasing: All policies trained on
human expert data exhibit the inverted U-shape curve as commonly seen in the literature [1, 2]. All policies trained
on Markovian expert data exhibit optimal execution horizon of T ∗
exec = 1 and near-monotonic decrease in success
rate with Texec. Given that the expert demonstrator was the only factor varied between the two sets of experiments,
6


Figure 3: Success-horizon curve with non-Markovian (NM) human vs scripted Markovian (M) expert demon-
strations for PushT-M (Top Left), GearInsertion (Top Right), and Kitchen (Bottom) tasks. All exhibit the
typical inverted U-shaped curve when trained on human data, but all become monotonically decreasing when trained
on Markovian expert data.
we determine that the nature of the Markovian expert’s data is the driver of the shift in success-horizon curve in each
benchmark task.
Notably, for FurnitureSimOneLeg, simply injecting non-Markovian behaviors into the Markovian scripted expert
restores the inverted U-shape, showing that certain non-Markovian behaviors necessitate long execution horizons. In
particular, we find non-Markovian features that make expert behavior depend on information especially difficult for
the policy to infer from its 2 frames of context to be most detrimental, such as sticky FSM transitions or latent-count
alignment maneuvers, where the policy is effectively unable to observe the passage of time or the latent count (for
example, while imitating a long pause, the policy is unable to determine how long it has been paused for based on 2
frames of context).
Low-horizon failures are consistent with our non-Markovianity hypothesis: Observing policy performance qual-
itatively, we find that dominant failure modes are caused by ambiguity in the desired action distribution when re-
planning, caused by the expert being non-Markovian. With only a context length of 2, policies may select actions that
appear valid based on their limited context, but are actually inconsistent with what the full-history conditioned expert
would select. This can lead to mode-switching or unbounded repetition of locally valid motions.
For instance, in FurnitureSimOneLeg, we observe many failures around aligning to pick up the table leg or aligning
before insertion; the robot hovers and repeats valid approach maneuvers as demonstrated by the expert, but never
commits to the pick or insertion. In GearInsertion, similar failures occur when the robot aligns the gear to the shaft,
rapidly switching between behaviors until failure. In PushT-M, because of how multimodal the task and demonstra-
tions are, repeated mode-switching occurs almost anywhere around the T. In Kitchen, we observe the policy switch
from one expert-consistent motion to another when very near two subtasks, ultimately completing neither. We vi-
7


sualize these failure modes in Fig. 4. Taken together, these behaviors point to expert non-Markovianity as the root
cause: short-context policies cannot infer which of several locally valid expert behaviors is consistent with the entire
trajectory history. Long execution horizons reduce this planning ambiguity by simply committing to a single mode for
longer and re-planning less often.
We discuss this mechanism further in Sec. C.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4: Illustration of common failure modes of short-context policies using short execution horizons. (a):
FurnitureSimOneLeg: robot cycles between coherent alignment motions but fails to transition to insertion, causing
timeout. (b): FurnitureSimOneLeg: robot performs repeated alignment motions with the table leg, but fails to
transition to grasp. (c): GearInsertion: robot repeatedly aligns gear with shaft. (d): Push-T: the robot jitters
until timeout, oscillating between two modes (pushing the T rightward versus moving around to push it upward). (e):
Kitchen: robot approaches light switch but abruptly changes course toward the top knob and collides.
So far we have only commented on how long execution horizons help address multimodality arising from the policy
having limited context compared to the expert. However, the action distribution induced by a collection of expert
demonstrations might itself be multimodal and thus could plausibly cause mode-switching in policy execution as well;
while we don’t explicitly study this case here, we discuss it in Sec. G.
Reactivity is consistently beneficial even in quasi-static tasks: We note that none of our tasks are inherently dynamic
or unpredictable. Nevertheless, across all tasks, policies trained on Markovian expert data perform best at or near
Texec = 1, when they are most reactive. These experiments show that, even in seemingly static tasks, errors in execution
and in the learned dynamics are nearly unavoidable, making reactive feedback broadly beneficial in manipulation, not
only in inherently dynamic settings. While ablating Texec is not common in prior work, selecting the best Texec can
yield substantial improvements of tens of percentage points in absolute success rates. We discuss concrete examples
of the benefits of reactivity in these benchmark tasks in Sec. H.
Key Takeaway. Across tasks, longer execution horizons are beneficial when short-context policies imitate non-
Markovian demonstrations. When the expert is Markovian, the optimal execution horizon shifts to T ∗
exec = 1, and
the most reactive policies perform best. Expert non-Markovianity is therefore a key driver of the success-horizon
curve.
4.2
Investigating the Role of Compounding Errors
Zhang et al. [13] identify mitigating compounding errors as a key function of long execution horizons. We test the prac-
tical importance of this mechanism on FurnitureSimOneLeg using two interventions designed to improve train–test
state-distribution alignment and compare their effects with those of changing expert Markovianity. If compounding
errors strongly determine the success-horizon curve, these interventions should disproportionately improve perfor-
mance with short execution horizons and shift the optimum toward T ∗
exec = 1. Across these interventions, we observe
only modest shifts compared with those caused by changing expert Markovianity, suggesting that compounding errors
matter but do not alone explain the success-horizon curve in this setting.
Intervention 1: Data scale. We begin with the simplest intervention: increasing the amount of training data. While
this does not directly correct mismatch between the expert and policy-induced state distributions, broader state cover-
age is more likely to include states induced by the learned policy, which can mitigate compounding errors [57, 58].
In Fig. 5, for the scripted Markovian expert, we observe a clear distinction between the lowest data scale and the
moderate-to-high data regime. With only 100 demonstrations, even the policy trained on deterministic Markovian
8


Figure 5: Success-horizon curve at dataset sizes ∈{100, 200, 400, 1000} demonstrations, using both Markovian
(Right) and non-Markovian (Left) scripted expert data. Only at the lowest data scale (100 demonstrations), we find
compounding errors to play a significant role in shaping the curve, causing even the policy trained on Markovian expert
data to prefer a long execution horizon. Above 200 demonstrations, we find increasing dataset size only modestly shifts
preference toward lower execution horizons.
expert data performs best at a non-trivial execution horizon of Texec = 4, indicating that limited state coverage and the
resulting compounding errors can substantially shape the success-horizon curve. From 200 to 1,000 demonstrations,
however, additional data produces only a slight tilt toward shorter execution horizons, indicating that compounding
errors have comparatively modest influence once moderate state coverage is reached. Thus, our results support Zhang
et al.’s hypothesis in the most data-limited setting, but suggest that, in the moderate-to-high data regime targeted by
our main experiments, compounding errors are a secondary contributor with a substantially smaller effect than expert
non-Markovianity.
Intervention 2: HG-DAgger. Next, we run 3 iterations of semi-automated human-gated DAgger (HG-DAgger) [59]
on our policies trained on 200 Markovian and non-Markovian expert demonstrations. For each execution horizon
independently, we first roll out the base policy, record failed episodes, manually annotate an intervention timestep for
each failure, reset the simulation to that timestep, and collect an expert correction from that timestep onward. We then
fine-tune the policy on the additional correction data, and repeat this process for 3 iterations. In our experiment, each
round of HG-DAgger adds 40 correction demonstrations. Note that we only consider Texec ∈{1, 3, 6, 10, 15} instead
of the denser sweep used in our other experiments because of the large amount of manual annotation required per
value of Texec. See Sec. D for more details.
Figure 6: Success-horizon curves after applying HG-DAgger for Scripted Markovian (Right) and non-Markovian
(Left) expert-trained policies. We find no noticeable shift for the non-Markovian expert-trained policy, and a slight
shift favoring lower execution horizons for the Markovian expert-trained policy.
9


In Fig. 6, we find no significant shift over the 3 HG-DAgger iterations for the policy trained on non-Markovian expert
data, and a slight shift favoring lower execution horizons for the policy trained on Markovian expert data. These
results support that compounding errors contribute to the success-horizon curve for the Markovian expert case, but the
effects become less noticeable in the presence of expert non-Markoviany. Qualitatively, we observe that successive
HG-DAgger rounds primarily correct basic manipulation failures, such as missed insertions and screwing failures.
For policies trained on non-Markovian expert data, however, HG-DAgger does not eliminate failures caused by cyclic
or idle behaviors, such as repeatedly aligning to the leg during pick-up or repeatedly aligning before insertion (see
Figs. 4a and 4b). Because the corrections remain non-Markovian, HG-DAgger does not remove (but rather perhaps
reinforces) the ambiguity faced by short-context policies when re-planning that causes these cyclic failures.
Finally, we provide several supporting analyses in the appendix. We evaluate exploratory noise injection, a com-
plementary compounding errors mitigation technique proposed by Zhang et al. [13]. We also examine how proper
checkpoint selection and policy architecture both demonstrate the impact of compounding errors while showing how
it can be limited in practice. See Sec. E (exploratory noise injection), Sec. I (checkpoint selection), and Sec. F.3
(architectural effects).
Key Takeaway.
Across interventions designed to mitigate compounding errors: (i) increasing dataset size and (ii) HG-DAgger,
we observe at most modest shifts toward shorter execution horizons, even when the interventions improve overall
success. Within FurnitureSimOneLeg and the interventions tested, expert Markovianity therefore appears to
have a stronger influence on the success-horizon curve than compounding errors.
Given that results in Sec. 4.1.2 are consistent across tasks, we expect the results in this section to readily extend to
other tasks as well.
5
Long Context Reduces the Need for Long Execution Horizons
In this section we demonstrate that training policies with longer context lengths reduces reliance on long exe-
cution horizons and enables higher-performing reactive policies.
In Sec. 4.1, we argue that long execution horizons primarily mitigate the planning ambiguity that arises when short-
context policies imitate non-Markovian expert behavior. We thus hypothesize that increasing context length should
disproportionately improve policy performance at short execution horizons and shift the optimal horizon toward
T ∗
exec = 1. Ablations across all 4 simulation benchmarks and 2 additional real-world tasks consistently support this
hypothesis, with sufficiently long contexts making closed-loop execution optimal or near-optimal. At high data scales,
long-context, short-execution-horizon policies even outperform short-context policies that rely on longer open-loop
execution.
5.1
Methodology
Contemporary techniques for training policies that condition on a large number of raw image observations are still
evolving. In this section, we propose new heuristics related to visual encoding to improve long-context performance.
For FurnitureSimOneLeg, GearInsertion, and the two real-world tasks, following [36], we use a U-Net Diffusion
Policy architecture with cross-attention conditioning. We also apply a new method we call the “double encoder”, where
the policy maintains separate image encoders (with separate parameters) for short-range and long-range observations.
The most recent short range images are encoded by both encoders, and all earlier frames are encoded only by the
long-range encoder; the U-Net conditions on all features via cross-attention. Intuitively, the double encoder allows the
policy to learn separate representations for immediate control versus long-range planning and inferring expert hidden
state. To prevent the policy from relying exclusively on the short-range pathway and ignoring long-range features, we
also apply a dropout on the short-range encoder output, replacing it with a learned “null” feature vector with some
probability during training. In practice, we use short range = 2 and a dropout rate of 0.3 for all policies. See
Sec. F.1 for more details. Although the double encoder is a heuristic architectural choice, we find that it stabilizes the
performance of the long-context policies, enables effective recall of semantic information even with very long context
lengths, and gives more predictable performance results (see Sec. F.2).
10


For PushT-D, following [35, 36], we use the baseline FiLM-conditioned U-Net with frozen observation encoder
initialized from a trained short-context (To = 2) policy. For Kitchen, we use just the baseline FiLM-conditioned U-
Net (fully fine-tuned for each context length). These simpler architectures proved sufficient for these tasks and show
that our results generalize across architectures. As presented in [36], naive context length scaling can be sufficient for
U-Net architectures in moderate-to-high data regimes.
We otherwise use the same training and evaluation methodologies as described in Sec. 4.1.
5.2
Results and Discussion
On FurnitureSimOneLeg, we first train Diffusion Policies with context lengths To ∈{2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20} on a dataset
of 200 human demonstrations. The resulting success-horizon curves are shown in Fig. 7. With the standard To = 2, the
policy exhibits the typical inverted U-shaped success-horizon curve with intermediate execution horizons (Texec = 6)
performing best. As To increases, the optimal execution horizon T ∗
exec shifts left. At To = 16 and 20, the curve
becomes nearly monotonically decreasing with optimal execution horizon T ∗
exec = 1 or 2, indicating that, at long
context lengths, the highest-performing policies do not rely on long execution horizons and are the most reactive.
Figure 7: Success-horizon curves of policies trained across a range of context lengths for FurnitureSimOneLeg,
on 200 human demonstrations. As context length increases, peak performance shifts toward shorter execution hori-
zons, with the longest-context policies performing best at execution horizons of 1 or 2.
Next, because increasing context length substantially expands the policy’s input space, increasing risk of encountering
out-of-distribution inputs during rollout, we hypothesized that increasing dataset size would continue to improve
performance at low execution horizons [36]. Therefore, we repeat the experiment with 200 and 1000 demonstrations
generated by our non-Markovian scripted expert and compare results in Fig. 8.4 We observe the same qualitative trend:
increasing context length disproportionately improves performance at lower execution horizons, shifting the optimal
execution horizon T ∗
exec left. Further, comparing the success-horizon curves at 200 and 1000 demonstrations shows
that increasing dataset size directly amplifies this trend. At 200 demonstrations, long-context policies with Texec < 4
still underperform, but at 1000 demonstrations, the highest-performing policies use long context lengths with highly
reactive execution and significantly outperform the best To = 2 policy.
Evaluating long-context policies on the remaining three simulation benchmarks: PushT-D, GearInsertion, and
Kitchen, we find the same pattern holds: across all tasks, as context length is scaled high enough for the given task,
the success-horizon curve becomes nearly monotonically decreasing and the most reactive policy is optimal or near-
optimal. These results are consistent with our Expert Markovianity hypothesis (Sec. 4): longer history makes more of
4We note that we should expect a context length of 30 frames to be required to nearly reproduce the expert, as the injected history-
dependent behaviors can span up to 30 frames (see Sec. 4.1.1). Some latent variables may remain fundamentally unobservable,
although longer context provides more information from which they may be inferred.
11


Figure 8: Success-horizon curves of policies trained across a range of context lengths for FurnitureSimOneLeg,
on 200 and 1000 non-Markovian scripted expert demonstrations. We find increasing dataset size disproportion-
ately improves performance of long-context policies at low execution horizons. With 1000 demonstrations, the highest
performing policies use long context length To of 12 – 20 and short execution horizon Texec < 4 and achieve 93.2%
success, outperforming the best short-context (To = 2) policy at Texec = 6 with 90.6% success.
the expert’s latent, history-dependent state inferable to the policy, reducing the need to preserve action commitment
through long execution horizons.
Figure 9:
Success-horizon curves of policies trained across a range of context lengths for PushT-D,
GearInsertion, and Kitchen on human demonstrations. Dataset sizes are 160 demonstrations for PushT-D,
200 for GearInsertion, and 581 for Kitchen. With sufficiently long context length, Texec = 1 becomes optimal or
near-optimal in all tasks.
Lastly, we evaluate long-context policies on two real-world, highly-dexterous bimanual tasks: SinglePillDispense
and SlipIntoBaggie, illustrated in Fig. 10.
Both of these tasks require careful, reactive dexterity — SinglePillDispense requires gentle tilting and inten-
tional shaking to shift the pills toward the edge of the bottle without dumping out more than 1; SlipIntoBaggie
requires careful shimmying to fit the paper slip into the baggie, which is barely larger than the paper. We train
SinglePillDispense policies on just 1.34 hours of teleop data (516 demonstrations) and SlipIntoBaggie policies
on 5.24 hours of data (540 demonstrations). We assess To ∈{2, 8, 12} and Texec ∈{2, 4, 8}, and present results in
Table 1. See Sec. A.3 for additional details.
12


Figure
10:
Real-world
SinglePillDispense
(Left)
and
SlipIntoBaggie
(Right)
tasks.
In
SinglePillDispense, a successful rollout dumps a single pill out of the bottle onto the cap and then rights
the bottle. In SlipIntoBaggie, a successful rollout fully inserts the paper slip into the baggie without crumpling the
paper.
As in the simulation experiments, increasing context length from To = 2 to To = 8 shifts the optimal execution hori-
zon from T ∗
exec = 8 to T ∗
exec = 2 while improving absolute performance. Reactivity appears to be highly beneficial in
both tasks — in SinglePillDispense, to stop dumping as soon as one pill is dispensed, and in SlipIntoBaggie,
to react to unexpected paper or baggie deformities. However, reactive, short-execution-horizon policies do not per-
form well without extending context length to retain the behavioral coherence that long execution horizons would
otherwise provide. These results show that our findings generalize under real-world visual distribution shifts, variable
dynamics, and inference latency: long context lengths enable short execution horizons and outperform short-context,
long-execution-horizon baselines.
Table 1: SinglePillDispense and SlipIntoBaggie success rates over 20 trials, with 95% confidence intervals.
SinglePillDispense
SlipIntoBaggie
Texec = 2
Texec = 4
Texec = 8
Texec = 2
Texec = 4
Texec = 8
To = 2
50% [29.9, 70.1]
60% [38.7, 78.1]
75% [53.1, 88.8]
60% [38.7, 78.1]
40% [21.9, 61.3]
80% [58.4, 91.9]
To = 8
90% [69.9, 97.2]
80% [58.4, 91.9]
60% [38.7, 78.1]
85% [64.0, 94.8]
70% [48.1, 85.5]
55% [34.2, 74.2]
To = 12
75% [53.1, 88.8]
70% [48.1, 85.5]
60% [38.7, 78.1]
75% [53.1, 88.8]
65% [43.3, 81.9]
65% [43.3, 81.9]
Finally, we note that performance declines at To = 12 in both SinglePillDispense and SlipIntoBaggie, reflect-
ing a broader pattern across our experiments: once the benefits of additional history saturate, the increased sample
complexity of longer context lengths degrades performance. At the data scales used in our experiments, this degra-
dation usually occurs only beyond the context length needed for a low-execution-horizon, reactive policy to achieve
the highest absolute performance, and higher data scales extend the range of beneficial context lengths. However,
determining the optimal tradeoff, and how it scales with data, remains future work.
Key Takeaway.
Increasing context length shifts peak performance toward shorter execution horizons, with sufficiently long con-
text lengths reaching optimal T ∗
exec of 1 – 2. Long-context, reactive control also scales favorably with data,
outperforming short-context, long-execution-horizon baselines at sufficiently high data scales.
Taken together, these results establish long-context, reactive control as a viable and higher-performing alterna-
tive to long, open-loop execution in the moderate-to-high-data regime.
6
Discussion and Conclusion
In this section, we conclude with additional discussion and directions for future research in robotic imitation learning.
13


Firstly, we emphasize that data scale is an important experimental variable. With the exception of the dataset-
size ablation in Fig. 5 (and the Push-T context length experiments in Fig. 9), all of our experiments use at least 200
demonstrations. We chose to study this moderate-to-high-data regime because it more closely reflects deployment-
oriented robotics, where training on large datasets is increasingly necessary and common. Our ablation illustrates why
this matters: with only 100 demonstrations, even a policy imitating a fully observable, deterministic, Markovian expert
requires non-trivial execution horizon, whereas this preference disappears as dataset size increases. Because datasets
of 50 – 100 demonstrations remain common in robotics research, we encourage evaluating results across dataset
sizes to ensure results hold at scale.
Secondly, we believe that the prevailing approach to policy training — combining short context lengths with long open-
loop execution horizons — is poorly aligned with both human behavior and the desired operation regime of responsive
robotic systems. While long execution horizons were previously recommended to avoid causal confusion risks of
history-conditioning [1], advances in data scale, compute, and policy architectures have since changed this tradeoff.
Recent work shows that even naively extending context length is substantially less brittle than previously believed if
appropriate architectures are selected [36]; and there are many other avenues to pursue long-context learning [35–
38, 40]. We therefore encourage practitioners to train policies with longer contexts — even modestly longer
with 4 – 8 frames — and evaluate correspondingly shorter execution horizons.
Finally, we observe that the current literature in long-context learning has focused on “global”, task-relevant observ-
ability and memory; things like selecting the correct manipuland, counting repetitions, or recalling the location of
hidden objects (i.e. in the “shell game” [42, 60]). Accordingly, many methods represent observations through com-
pact language-like tokens or summaries while retaining only the most recent visual frame as direct observation input.
Our results highlight a more subtle role of context that such summaries may not fully capture: by resolving hidden-
state aliasing and enabling shorter execution horizons, raw, visual context is critical for reactive, coherent, “local”
control. Yet, exploration of such context has been limited to only a few works [35, 36]. While semantic memory is
important for long-horizon manipulation, we believe context-encoding methods should also be evaluated on dexter-
ous tasks under short execution horizons. A method of encoding context that effectively recalls locations of hidden
objects but does not enable effective manipulation with an execution horizon of 1, we argue, is missing an important
dimension of temporal understanding.
14


Acknowledgments
We thank Leslie Kaelbling and Anthony Simeonov for thoughtful discussions and feedback and John Marangola for
suggestions on our teleop interface. Hardware experiments for this project were supported by Mundane Systems Inc.
This material is based upon work supported by Amazon.com Services LLC PO #2D-19307345, the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF) Engineering Research Center for Human AugmentatioN via Dexterity (HAND) (Grant No.
2330040), and Toyota Research Institute PO #003859. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) only.
We thank The Infrastructure Group at MIT CSAIL for maintaining the computing resources primarily used for this
work. We also acknowledge the MIT SuperCloud and Lincoln Laboratory Supercomputing Center for providing HPC,
database, and consultation resources [61].
References
[1] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost
hardware, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13705.
[2] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor
policy learning via action diffusion, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137.
[3] M. J. Kim, C. Finn, and P. Liang. Fine-tuning vision-language-action models: Optimizing speed and success,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19645.
[4] O. M. Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees, S. Dasari, J. Hejna, T. Kreiman, C. Xu, J. Luo,
Y. L. Tan, L. Y. Chen, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Xiao, D. Sadigh, C. Finn, and S. Levine. Octo: An open-source
generalist robot policy, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12213.
[5] S. Li, Y. Gao, D. Sadigh, and S. Song. Unified video action model, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2503.00200.
[6] Y. Ze, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Wang, and H. Xu. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy
learning via simple 3d representations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03954.
[7] S. Liu, L. Wu, B. Li, H. Tan, H. Chen, Z. Wang, K. Xu, H. Su, and J. Zhu. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model
for bimanual manipulation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07864.
[8] T. Z. Zhao, J. Tompson, D. Driess, P. Florence, K. Ghasemipour, C. Finn, and A. Wahid. Aloha unleashed: A
simple recipe for robot dexterity, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13126.
[9] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter,
S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, L. X. Shi, J. Tanner,
Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, and U. Zhilinsky. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot
control, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24164.
[10] Physical Intelligence, K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn,
N. Fusai, M. Y. Galliker, D. Ghosh, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, D. LeBlanc,
S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, A. Z. Ren, L. X. Shi, L. Smith, J. T. Springenberg,
K. Stachowicz, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, H. Walke, A. Walling, H. Wang, L. Yu, and U. Zhilinsky. π0.5: a vision-
language-action model with open-world generalization, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16054.
[11] Figure AI. Helix accelerating real-world logistics. https://www.figure.ai/news/helix-logistics, Feb.
2025. Published February 26, 2025; accessed July 13, 2026.
[12] NVIDIA, J. Bjorck, F. Casta˜neda, N. Cherniadev, X. Da, R. Ding, L. J. Fan, Y. Fang, D. Fox, F. Hu, S. Huang,
J. Jang, Z. Jiang, J. Kautz, K. Kundalia, L. Lao, Z. Li, Z. Lin, K. Lin, G. Liu, E. Llontop, L. Magne, A. Mandlekar,
A. Narayan, S. Nasiriany, S. Reed, Y. L. Tan, G. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Xiang, Y. Xie, Y. Xu,
Z. Xu, S. Ye, Z. Yu, A. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Zheng, and Y. Zhu. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model
for generalist humanoid robots, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14734.
15


[13] T. T. Zhang, D. Pfrommer, C. Pan, N. Matni, and M. Simchowitz.
Action chunking and exploratory data
collection yield exponential improvements in behavior cloning for continuous control, 2025.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2507.09061.
[14] TRI LBM Team, J. Barreiros, A. Beaulieu, A. Bhat, R. Cory, E. Cousineau, H. Dai, C.-H. Fang, K. Hashimoto,
M. Z. Irshad, M. Itkina, N. Kuppuswamy, K.-H. Lee, K. Liu, D. McConachie, I. McMahon, H. Nishimura,
C. Phillips-Grafflin, C. Richter, P. Shah, K. Srinivasan, B. Wulfe, C. Xu, M. Zhang, A. Alspach, M. Ange-
les, K. Arora, V. C. Guizilini, A. Castro, D. Chen, T.-S. Chu, S. Creasey, S. Curtis, R. Denitto, E. Dixon,
E. Dusel, M. Ferreira, A. Goncalves, G. Gould, D. Guoy, S. Gupta, X. Han, K. Hatch, B. Hathaway, A. Henry,
H. Hochsztein, P. Horgan, S. Iwase, D. Jackson, S. Karamcheti, S. Keh, J. Masterjohn, J. Mercat, P. Miller,
P. Mitiguy, T. Nguyen, J. Nimmer, Y. Noguchi, R. Ong, A. Onol, O. Pfannenstiehl, R. Poyner, L. P. M. Rocha,
G. Richardson, C. Rodriguez, D. Seale, M. Sherman, M. Smith-Jones, D. Tago, P. Tokmakov, M. Tran, B. V.
Hoorick, I. Vasiljevic, S. Zakharov, M. Zolotas, R. Ambrus, K. Fetzer-Borelli, B. Burchfiel, H. Kress-Gazit,
S. Feng, S. Ford, and R. Tedrake. A careful examination of large behavior models for multitask dexterous
manipulation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05331.
[15] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi,
Q. Vuong, T. Kollar, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, D. Sadigh, S. Levine, P. Liang, and C. Finn. Openvla: An open-
source vision-language-action model, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09246.
[16] Z. Fu, T. Z. Zhao, and C. Finn. Mobile aloha: Learning bimanual mobile manipulation with low-cost whole-body
teleoperation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.02117.
[17] C. Yu, C. Sima, G. Jiang, H. Zhang, H. Mai, H. Li, H. Wang, J. Chen, K. Wu, L. Chen, L. Zhao, M. Shi,
P. Luo, Q. Bu, S. Peng, T. Li, and Y. Yuan. χ0: Resource-aware robust manipulation via taming distributional
inconsistencies, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.09021.
[18] K. Pertsch, K. Stachowicz, B. Ichter, D. Driess, S. Nair, Q. Vuong, O. Mees, C. Finn, and S. Levine. Fast:
Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.
09747.
[19] K. Black, M. Y. Galliker, and S. Levine. Real-time execution of action chunking flow policies, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07339.
[20] R. Malhotra, Y. Liu, and C. Finn. Self-guided action diffusion, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.
12189.
[21] Y. Liu, J. I. Hamid, A. Xie, Y. Lee, M. Du, and C. Finn. Bidirectional decoding: Improving action chunking via
guided test-time sampling, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.17355.
[22] K. Black, A. Z. Ren, M. Equi, and S. Levine. Training-time action conditioning for efficient real-time chunking,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.05964.
[23] A. Block, A. Jadbabaie, D. Pfrommer, M. Simchowitz, and R. Tedrake. Provable guarantees for generative
behavior cloning: Bridging low-level stability and high-level behavior, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2307.14619.
[24] F. Lazzati, K. Stachowicz, W. Chen, A. M. Metelli, A. Wagenmaker, and S. Levine. Why does action chunking
improve behavioral cloning performance in robotic control?, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.
02547.
[25] Y. Weng, X. Zhang, Y. Mu, Y. Zhu, and Y. Li. Temporal action selection for action chunking, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04421.
[26] Y. Zhao, M. Bogdanovic, A. Sohal, L. Tao, K. Darvish, A. Aspuru-Guzik, F. Shkurti, and A. Garg. Dynamic
execution horizon prediction for chunk-based robot policies, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.
11408.
16


[27] Y. Liang, X. Wang, K. Wang, S. Wang, X. Peng, H. Chen, D. K. H. Chua, and P. Vadakkepat. Adaptive action
chunking at inference-time for vision-language-action models, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.
04161.
[28] H. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. Yan, R. R. Kompella, and G. Liu. Vla knows its limits: Adaptive execution horizons for
robot policies, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.21445.
[29] D. Niu, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, B. Shao, Z.-H. Yin, A. Pai, Y. Sharma, S. Saravalle, R. Zheng, J. Wang, R. Punamiya,
M. Xu, Y. Xie, Y. Jiang, L. Fu, K. Kallidromitis, M. Gioia, J. Zhang, J. Ge, H. Feng, F. Galasso, W. Zhan, D. M.
Chan, Y. Bai, R. Herzig, J. Lei, L. Fei-Fei, K. Goldberg, J. Malik, P. Abbeel, Y. Zhu, D. Xu, L. Fan, and T. Darrell.
T-rex: Tactile-reactive dexterous manipulation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.17055.
[30] H. Xue, J. Ren, W. Chen, G. Zhang, Y. Fang, G. Gu, H. Xu, and C. Lu. Reactive diffusion policy: Slow-
fast visual-tactile policy learning for contact-rich manipulation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.
02881.
[31] K. Sendai, M. Alvarez, T. Matsushima, Y. Matsuo, and Y. Iwasawa. Leave no observation behind: Real-time
correction for vla action chunks, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.23224.
[32] P. Wu, P. Zhang, Z. Wang, D. Wang, B. Zhao, and X. Li. Closed-loop action chunks with dynamic corrections
for training-free diffusion policy, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.01953.
[33] M. Wang, Z. Yue, R. Lu, Y. Li, Z. Wang, G. Pan, K. Dong, J. Cheng, Y. Cheng, and H. Liu. Phaforce: Phase-
scheduled visual-force policy learning with slow planning and fast correction for contact-rich manipulation,
2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.08342.
[34] P. de Haan, D. Jayaraman, and S. Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/1905.11979.
[35] M. Torne, A. Tang, Y. Liu, and C. Finn. Learning long-context diffusion policies via past-token prediction, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09561.
[36] A. Agarwal, A. Wei, T. Kargin, M. Zeng, C. Becker, A. K. Dayi, P. Parrilo, A. Ozdaglar, and R. Tedrake.
Training and evaluating diffusion policies with long context lengths, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2606.16447.
[37] M. Torne, K. Pertsch, H. Walke, K. Vedder, S. Nair, B. Ichter, A. Z. Ren, H. Wang, J. Tang, K. Stachowicz,
K. Dhabalia, M. Equi, Q. Vuong, J. T. Springenberg, S. Levine, C. Finn, and D. Driess. Mem: Multi-scale
embodied memory for vision language action models, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.03596.
[38] M. S. Mark, J. Liang, M. Attarian, C. Fu, D. Dwibedi, D. Shah, and A. Kumar. Bpp: Long-context robot imitation
learning by focusing on key history frames, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15010.
[39] R. Shah, Y. Li, F. Bello, Y. Zhu, and R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın. Memory retrieval in visuomotor policies for long-horizon
robot control, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.25136.
[40] A. Sridhar, J. Pan, S. Sharma, and C. Finn. Memer: Scaling up memory for robot control via experience retrieval,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.20328.
[41] Y. Lei, Z. Liang, H. Zhang, and P. Luo. Vpwem: Non-markovian visuomotor policy with working and episodic
memory, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.04910.
[42] X. Guo, C. Jiang, H. B. Kim, Y. Han, Y. Sun, Y. Xiao, and J. Yang. Chameleon: Control-indexed prospective
memory for visuomotor manipulation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.24576.
[43] R. Zheng, Y. Liang, S. Huang, J. Gao, H. D. III, A. Kolobov, F. Huang, and J. Yang. Tracevla: Visual trace
prompting enhances spatial-temporal awareness for generalist robotic policies, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2412.10345.
17


[44] H. Shi, B. Xie, Y. Liu, L. Sun, F. Liu, T. Wang, E. Zhou, H. Fan, X. Zhang, and G. Huang. Memoryvla:
Perceptual-cognitive memory in vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2508.19236.
[45] R. Li, W. Guo, Z. Wu, C. Wang, H. Deng, Z. Weng, Y.-P. Tan, and Z. Wang. Map-vla: Memory-augmented
prompting for vision-language-action model in robotic manipulation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2511.09516.
[46] M. Lin, X. Liang, B. Lin, J. Liu, Z. Jiao, K. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Sun, W. Liufu, Y. Ma, J. Hu, Y. Liu, S. Zhao, Y. Zhuang,
and X. Liang. Echovla: Robotic vision-language-action model with synergistic declarative memory for mobile
manipulation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.18112.
[47] M. Lin, P. Ding, S. Wang, Z. Zhuang, Y. Liu, X. Tong, W. Song, S. Lyu, S. Huang, and D. Wang. Hif-vla:
Hindsight, insight and foresight through motion representation for vision-language-action models, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.09928.
[48] S. Ross, G. J. Gordon, and J. A. Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret
online learning, 2011. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1011.0686.
[49] M. Simchowitz, D. Pfrommer, and A. Jadbabaie. The pitfalls of imitation learning when actions are continuous,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.09722.
[50] Physical Intelligence, A. Amin, R. Aniceto, A. Balakrishna, K. Black, K. Conley, G. Connors, J. Darpinian,
K. Dhabalia, J. DiCarlo, D. Driess, M. Equi, A. Esmail, Y. Fang, C. Finn, C. Glossop, T. Godden, I. Goryachev,
L. Groom, H. Hancock, K. Hausman, G. Hussein, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, R. Jen, T. Jones, B. Katz, L. Ke,
C. Kuchi, M. Lamb, D. LeBlanc, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, Y. Lu, V. Mano, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, A. Z.
Ren, C. Sharma, L. X. Shi, L. Smith, J. T. Springenberg, K. Stachowicz, W. Stoeckle, A. Swerdlow, J. Tanner,
M. Torne, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, B. Williams, S. Yoo, L. Yu, U. Zhilinsky, and Z. Zhou. π∗
0.6: a vla
that learns from experience, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.14759.
[51] M. Heo, Y. Lee, D. Lee, and J. J. Lim. Furniturebench: Reproducible real-world benchmark for long-horizon
complex manipulation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12821.
[52] A. Wei, A. Agarwal, B. Chen, R. Bosworth, N. Pfaff, and R. Tedrake.
Empirical analysis of sim-and-real
cotraining of diffusion policies for planar pushing from pixels, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.
22634.
[53] A. Gupta, V. Kumar, C. Lynch, S. Levine, and K. Hausman. Relay policy learning: Solving long-horizon tasks
via imitation and reinforcement learning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.11956.
[54] T. Mu, Z. Ling, F. Xiang, D. Yang, X. Li, S. Tao, Z. Huang, Z. Jia, and H. Su.
Maniskill: Generalizable
manipulation skill benchmark with large-scale demonstrations, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.
14483.
[55] R. Tedrake and the Drake Development Team. Drake: Model-based design and verification for robotics, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://drake.mit.edu.
[56] J. Masterjohn, D. Guoy, J. Shepherd, and A. Castro. Velocity level approximation of pressure field contact
patches, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.04157.
[57] M. Laskey, J. Lee, R. Fox, A. Dragan, and K. Goldberg. Dart: Noise injection for robust imitation learning,
2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.09327.
[58] J. D. Chang, M. Uehara, D. Sreenivas, R. Kidambi, and W. Sun. Mitigating covariate shift in imitation learning
via offline data without great coverage, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03207.
[59] M. Kelly, C. Sidrane, K. Driggs-Campbell, and M. J. Kochenderfer. Hg-dagger: Interactive imitation learning
with human experts, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.02890.
[60] Rhoda AI Team. Causal video models are data-efficient robot policy learners. Rhoda AI Blog, 2026.
18


[61] A. Reuther, J. Kepner, C. Byun, S. Samsi, W. Arcand, D. Bestor, B. Bergeron, V. Gadepally, M. Houle,
M. Hubbell, M. Jones, A. Klein, L. Milechin, J. Mullen, A. Prout, A. Rosa, C. Yee, and P. Michaleas. Inter-
active supercomputing on 40,000 cores for machine learning and data analysis. In 2018 IEEE High Perfor-
mance extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), page 1–6. IEEE, 2018. doi:10.1109/hpec.2018.8547629. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPEC.2018.8547629.
[62] L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, I. Shenfeld, and P. Agrawal. Juicer: Data-efficient imitation learning for robotic assem-
bly, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03729.
[63] NVIDIA, M. Mittal, P. Roth, J. Tigue, A. Richard, O. Zhang, P. Du, A. Serrano-Mu˜noz, X. Yao, R. Zurbr¨ugg,
N. Rudin, L. Wawrzyniak, M. Rakhsha, A. Denzler, E. Heiden, A. Borovicka, O. Ahmed, I. Akinola, A. An-
war, M. T. Carlson, J. Y. Feng, A. Garg, R. Gasoto, L. Gulich, Y. Guo, M. Gussert, A. Hansen, M. Kulkarni,
C. Li, W. Liu, V. Makoviychuk, G. Malczyk, H. Mazhar, M. Moghani, A. Murali, M. Noseworthy, A. Pod-
dubny, N. Ratliff, W. Rehberg, C. Schwarke, R. Singh, J. L. Smith, B. Tang, R. Thaker, M. Trepte, K. V. Wyk,
F. Yu, A. Millane, V. Ramasamy, R. Steiner, S. Subramanian, C. Volk, C. Chen, N. Jawale, A. V. Kuruttukulam,
M. A. Lin, A. Mandlekar, K. Patzwaldt, J. Welsh, H. Zhao, F. Anes, J.-F. Lafleche, N. Mo¨enne-Loccoz, S. Park,
R. Stepinski, D. V. Gelder, C. Amevor, J. Carius, J. Chang, A. H. Chen, P. de Heras Ciechomski, G. Daviet,
M. Mohajerani, J. von Muralt, V. Reutskyy, M. Sauter, S. Schirm, E. L. Shi, P. Terdiman, K. Vilella, T. Wid-
mer, G. Yeoman, T. Chen, S. Grizan, C. Li, L. Li, C. Smith, R. Wiltz, K. Alexis, Y. Chang, D. Chu, L. J. Fan,
F. Farshidian, A. Handa, S. Huang, M. Hutter, Y. Narang, S. Pouya, S. Sheng, Y. Zhu, M. Macklin, A. Mora-
vanszky, P. Reist, Y. Guo, D. Hoeller, and G. State. Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation framework for
multi-modal robot learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04831.
[64] Y. Narang, K. Storey, I. Akinola, M. Macklin, P. Reist, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, A. Moravanszky, G. State,
M. Lu, A. Handa, and D. Fox. Factory: Fast contact for robotic assembly, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2205.03532.
[65] A. Mandlekar, S. Nasiriany, B. Wen, I. Akinola, Y. Narang, L. Fan, Y. Zhu, and D. Fox. Mimicgen: A data
generation system for scalable robot learning using human demonstrations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2310.17596.
[66] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms, 2017.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
[67] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition, 2015.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[68] S. Nair, A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, C. Finn, and A. Gupta. R3m: A universal visual representation for robot
manipulation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.12601.
[69] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang, R. Kulkarni, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, Y. Zhu, and
R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın. What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manipulation, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03298.
[70] O. Sim´eoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, C. Jose, V. Khalidov, M. Szafraniec, S. Yi, M. Ra-
mamonjisoa, F. Massa, D. Haziza, L. Wehrstedt, J. Wang, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, L. Sentana, C. Roberts,
A. Vedaldi, J. Tolan, J. Brandt, C. Couprie, J. Mairal, H. J´egou, P. Labatut, and P. Bojanowski. Dinov3, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10104.
[71] C. He, X. Liu, G. S. Camps, G. Sartoretti, and M. Schwager. Demystifying diffusion policies: Action memoriza-
tion and simple lookup table alternatives, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.05787.
[72] C. Pan, G. Anantharaman, N.-C. Huang, C. Jin, D. Pfrommer, C. Yuan, F. Permenter, G. Qu, N. Boffi, G. Shi,
and M. Simchowitz. Much ado about noising: Dispelling the myths of generative robotic control, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.01809.
[73] G. Raskutti, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Yu. Early stopping and non-parametric regression: An optimal data-
dependent stopping rule, 2013. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.3574.
19


[74] Generalist Team. Gen-0: Embodied foundation models that scale with physical interaction. Generalist AI Blog,
2025. https://generalistai.com/blog/gen-0.
[75] Sunday Robotics. Act-2 preview: Generalizing reliability. Sunday Robotics Blog, jul 2026. URL https:
//www.sunday.ai/blog/act-2-preview.
A
Experimental Setup
A.1
Benchmark Simulation Task Details
For FurnitureSimOneLeg [51], the goal of the task is to push the table top into the obstacle corner, pick up the table
leg, then screw the table leg into the table top. The poses of the table top and table leg are randomized at the start of
the episode using the “low” randomization setting provided by FurnitureSim [51]. The scene has two cameras, a static
front-facing camera and a wrist-mounted camera. Proprioceptive state and action space and policy predicted-action
frequencies for all tasks are summarized in Tables 2 and 3. Our expert comparison experiments (Fig. 2) use datasets
of 200 demonstrations from each expert type. We use a SpaceMouse and adapt code from [62] to collect human
demonstrations.
In Push-T, the goal of the task is to push the T-shaped slider from a randomly initialized pose to a fixed goal pose. The
robot is constrained to motion within the XY plane with a fixed end-effector Z coordinate and uses a cylindrical tool
that allows only approximately point contacts with the T. We created a planar variant of the ManiSkill [54] Push-T
environment, use the ManiSkill RL training pipeline to train our Markovian expert (see Sec. A.2 for more detail),
and evaluate performance between Markovian and human experts (Fig. 3) in ManiSkill. However, for our Push-T
long-context ablation (Fig. 9), we use the Push-T environment in Drake [55] (as well as the open source dataset)
provided by [52]. The ManiSkill and Drake task variants are identical beyond simulation parameters except that the
Drake implementation adds an additional requirement that the robot must return to its start position after pushing the T
for success. The reason for the difference in simulators is that Drake provides a richer hydroelastic contact model [56]
that makes it well-suited for planar pushing, but training an RL expert is much more amenable in ManiSkill due to its
GPU parallelism and simulation speed. Both scenes use two cameras, a static front-facing camera and a wrist-mounted
camera. Our human vs Markovian expert comparison (Fig. 3) uses datasets of 300 demonstrations for each while our
context length ablation (Fig. 9) uses 160 demonstrations.
For GearInsertion, the goal of the task is to pick up a gear initialized at a random pose and insert it onto a gear
carrier, meshing it with the other gears. We use an adaptation of the “Factory Gear Mesh” task in IsaacLab [63, 64].
The scene has three cameras, a static front-facing camera, a static rear-left, upward-angled camera, and a wrist-
mounted camera. The rear-left camera is added to improve visibility of the shaft and gear bore during insertion. All
GearInsertion experiments (Figs. 3 and 9) use datasets of 200 demonstrations. The “human” expert dataset consists
of 100 demonstrations collected using a SpaceMouse and 100 additional demonstrations synthetically generated using
MimicGen [65]. The Markovian expert dataset consists of 200 successful rollouts from our Markovian scripted expert
as described in Sec. A.2.
For Kitchen, the goal of the task is to complete any 4 subtasks, among 7 total: opening the microwave, moving the
kettle to the far burner, turning the top or bottom knob, flipping the light switch, opening the left cupboard door, and
sliding open the right cupboard door. All subtasks begin in their incomplete states. Success is determined when any 4
are completed. We use the environment from [53] (with 2 added cameras — a scene camera and wrist camera) as well
as the publicly released 581 human demonstrations (which we re-rendered with camera observations) combined with
581 Markovian scripted expert demonstrations that we generated for all experiments (Figs. 3 and 9).
A.2
Markovian Experts for Push-T, GearInsertion, and Kitchen
For Push-T, we train a Markovian Reinforcement Learning (RL) policy and evaluate it deterministically to generate
Markovian expert data. The RL policy is parameterized as a Gaussian policy with an MLP and is trained from scratch
using PPO [66].
For GearInsertion, like for FurnitureSimOneLeg, we develop a Markovian scripted expert that uses a finite-state-
machine (FSM) that determines its action using only the current environment state. For GearInsertion, in order
20


Table 2: Benchmark Tasks – Proprioceptive Inputs and Action Spaces
Task
Proprioceptive State
Action Space
FurnitureSimOneLeg
16D: end-effector pose, velocity, and grip-
per width
10D: delta end-effector command (3D
translation, 6D rotation, 1D gripper)
Push-T
3D: planar end-effector position and orien-
tation
2D: delta end-effector position in the
XY plane
GearInsertion
9D: 3D end-effector position, 4D orienta-
tion quaternion, 2D gripper state
7D: delta end-effector pose and gripper
command
Kitchen
9D: seven arm-joint positions and two
gripper-finger positions
9D: velocity commands for the seven
arm joints and two gripper joints
Table 3: Benchmark Tasks – Policy Action Prediction Frequencies
Task
Predicted-Action Frequency
FurnitureSimOneLeg
10 Hz
Push-T
10 Hz
GearInsertion
30 Hz
Kitchen
12.5 Hz
to introduce some diversity during insertion (to prevent perfect insertions during all demonstrations, which yields a
very thin training data manifold that the learner would easily step off of during rollout), we inject a small amount of
Gaussian noise into both the executed and recorded actions proposed by the expert.
For Kitchen, we develop a deterministic Markovian scripted FSM-based expert for each of the 7 individual subtasks.
During rollout, to complete sequences of 4 subtasks, we chain 4 of the subtask policies together with return-to-home
primitives connecting them.
Because Kitchen permits completing any sequence of 4 of the 7 subtasks, the environment state alone does not
uniquely specify which subtask the expert should execute next. To generate diverse Markovian expert demonstrations
covering different subtask permutations, we sample a four-subtask sequence before each rollout and record it as an
additional conditioning variable. Both the scripted expert and the Diffusion Policy have access to this sequence,
making the expert’s current and future subtask intent observable to the learner. Without this conditioning variable,
randomly selecting a sequence would introduce latent expert state: identical environment states could produce different
actions depending on a previously selected but unobserved subtask ordering. Note that this subtask sequence label is
used only for the Markovian scripted-expert dataset and is not provided during human teleoperation.
To match Kitchen’s human teleop data collection environment (and the publicly released demonstration data), we
also add random noise to the recorded observations during scripted expert rollout.
For all tasks, we roll out the Markovian expert and retain only successful episodes in the dataset. Conditioning on
success may render the resulting induced expert non-Markovian; however, because our Markovian experts achieve
high success rates (above 90%), we expect this effect to be limited.
A.3
Hardware Experiment Details
SinglePillDispense.
The robot begins holding the pill bottle cap in its left gripper and pill bottle in its right
gripper and must dispense exactly one pill into the cap within 30 s. Dispensing more or less than 1 pill constitutes
failure. The time limit prevents incidental pill motion caused by prolonged, incoherent robot jitter from being counted
as success. Each pill weighs approximately 0.6 g., and the bottle contains up to 24 pills and measures 1.7 in. diameter
by 2.8 in. length.
SlipIntoBaggie.
The robot must pick up a plastic baggie from the table and a paper slip from an elevated surface,
then insert the slip into the baggie within 2 min. Success requires the slip to remain uncreased; an episode is terminated
and marked as failure if the slip is creased or actively being creased. The slip measures 83.7 × 73.8 mm (±2 mm),
and the baggie measures 127 × 76.2 mm.
21


Hardware and control implementation.
Both tasks use two ARX-5 follower arms with custom grippers, teleop-
erated using two ARX-5 leader arms. Observations comprise RGB images from two wrist-mounted Intel RealSense
D405 cameras and one overhead Intel RealSense D435 camera. We use the same training procedure as for the sim-
ulation tasks and train Diffusion Policies with delta end-effector-pose actions and 10 Hz actions and observations.
A 125 Hz linear interpolator generates intermediate target poses between the policy-predicted 10 Hz actions, which
are converted to target joint positions by an inverse-kinematics solver and executed by a low-level joint-position PD
controller. During evaluation, we apply two very simple but effective latency-control mechanisms. Firstly, we cache
observation embeddings for future inference calls to re-use, preventing redundant forward passes of the observation
encoder. Secondly, to avoid discontinuities between action chunks caused by inference latency, as discussed in Sec. 2,
we linearly interpolate from the final action of the previous chunk to the action 180 ms into the newly predicted chunk
before executing the remainder of the new chunk (the value of 180 ms was tuned empirically).
Evaluation procedure.
During training, we save the 5 checkpoints with lowest DDIM MSE loss on the validation
set. We screen each checkpoint using a small set of preliminary hardware rollouts, considering both task performance
and qualitative stability. We then evaluate the chosen checkpoint on an independent set of 20 additional trials. We note
that checkpoint selection was particularly important at long context lengths – we discuss this further in Sec. I.
Note on lighting variation.
We note that color-jitter augmentations were unintentionally omitted during training.
To limit lighting variation, all evaluations were conducted within the same five-hour window each day. Neverthe-
less, demonstrations were collected under varying lighting conditions, potentially adding extra visual variation into
the dataset and reducing the effectiveness of some data samples. We expect that re-training with stronger lighting
invariance would improve performance, particularly for longer-context policies that are already more subject to out-
of-distribution inputs.
B
Training and Evaluation Methods
B.1
Diffusion Policy
Diffusion Policy [2] represents πθ(At | Ot) as a conditional denoising diffusion model over action chunks. We
parameterize this distribution with a neural network ϵθ comprising image encoders that map the observation history Ot
to observation features and a conditional U-Net that conditions on these observation features and iteratively denoises
the action chunk.
During training, a clean expert chunk At is corrupted as
Ak
t = αkAt + σkϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I),
where k indexes the diffusion noise level. The policy learns a family of denoisers, one for each noise level, typically
by predicting the added noise:
min
θ
E(Ot,At)∼D,;k,;ϵ
hϵ −ϵθ(Ak
t , k, Ot)
2i
.
At inference time, the policy initializes AK
t
∼N(0, I) and iteratively denoises it to predict action chunk ˆAt. The
robot then executes the first Texec actions of ˆAt open-loop before re-querying the policy.
B.2
Training and Evaluation Parameters
In all simulation experiments, we use ResNet-18 [67] as the image encoder and fine-tune its weights during train-
ing. For FurnitureSimOneLeg, GearInsertion, and Kitchen, we initialize the encoder with R3M-pretrained
weights [68]. We use R3M because the ablations in [62] show that it outperforms ImageNet-1K, CLIP, and other ini-
tialization methods on FurnitureSim tasks. For Push-T, we instead use the ImageNet-1K-pretrained weights provided
by robomimic [69] and replace the encoder’s BatchNorm layers with GroupNorm, following Diffusion Policy [2]. For
the hardware experiments, SinglePillDispense and SlipIntoBaggie, we use a larger, pre-trained DINOv3 [70]
vision transformer and fine-tune during training with 1
10 of the policy learning rate. We find superior performance with
DINOv3 (compared to CLIP or ResNet-based image encoders) in high precision real-world tasks.
22


For inputs containing C cameras and To observation timesteps, we use C separate image encoders, one for each
camera, and share each encoder’s weights across the corresponding To timesteps for training efficiency. All remaining
shared training and model parameters are reported in Tables 4 and 5.
Table 4: Training Hyperparameters Shared for All Models
Parameter
Value
Max LR
10−4
LR Scheduler
Cosine
Weight Decay
10−6
Warmup Steps
500
Batch Size
64
Image Size Input
Ncameras×320×240×3
Image Size Encoder
Ncameras×224×224×3
Image Augmentations
95% random crop
Encoder Feature Projection Dim
128
Table 5: Diffusion Model Hyperparameters
Parameter
Value
U-Net Down dims
[256, 512, 1024]
U-Net Parameters
69 million
DDIM Inference Steps
10
For each dataset, we reserve 5% of demonstrations for validation (except in SinglePillDispense and
SlipIntoBaggie,
where
we
reserve
2%);
thus,
the
effective
training-set
size
is
0.95×
(0.98×
for
SinglePillDispense and SlipIntoBaggie) the stated number of demonstrations for each task. We intention-
ally train each policy well into the overfitting regime, where validation loss has increased substantially beyond its
minimum, because Diffusion Policies have often been found to achieve their best rollout performance in this regime
[71].
During training, we save checkpoints every 5 epochs. We then select the 5 checkpoints with the lowest DDIM MSE
loss on the validation set for closed-loop evaluation; we do not perform closed-loop evaluations during training. For
each of the 5 chosen checkpoints and each execution horizon, we run 500 evaluation episodes, terminating each
episode upon success or timeout. We set each task’s timeout to approximately 120% of the longest demonstration
in its dataset. Error bars throughout the paper denote 95% Wilson confidence intervals for the success probability of
the reported (highest-performing) checkpoint for each task, architecture, and execution-horizon configuration; they
characterize uncertainty from finite evaluation rollouts, but do not capture randomness from the training process. A
more rigorous analysis with explicit hypothesis testing and correction for multiple policy comparisons as in [14] is
desirable but left to future work.
C
Understanding the Benefits of Long Execution Horizons and Long Context
C.1
Why Long Execution Horizons Prevent Failure
In this section, we provide informal conceptual explanations for understanding why long execution horizons prevent
failure in the presence of non-Markovian demonstrations. For this section specifically, subscripts indicate time index,
and superscripts are used to distinguish states distinct in task space.
Consider the phenomenon of hidden-state aliasing: at a given state, conditioned on full history, the expert has a specific
action distribution. However, the policy’s short history may be consistent with multiple full histories in the training
dataset that induce different expert action distributions. Even a well-trained short-context imitator may therefore
sample an action from any one of these valid-appearing distributions and select an action inconsistent with the expert’s
full-history-conditioned behavior. This can send the policy down an incorrect path or into a cycle. We illustrate this
phenomenon with an example in Fig. 11.
23


Figure 11: Illustration of hidden-state aliasing in an idle demonstration. While making high precision maneuvers
in tasks like Push-T, humans often pause to align, observe, and think. Such pauses show up as a sequence of idle
actions ok
1 →ok
2 →· · · →ok
10 in the training data. In this example, the full-history conditioned expert πE advances
after it observes the 10th idle state. The imitator πθ only observes the current state o0 and cannot infer idle count, so
both idling and advancing appear valid. The imitator is therefore unlikely to reproduce the expert’s exact sequence of
10 idle actions before advancing, and may idle for much longer than desired, resulting in task timeout.
Long open-loop execution reduces the likelihood of incorrect action selection from hidden-state aliasing by reducing
the probability of the policy re-planning at an aliased state. In particular, a policy with execution horizon Texec re-
plans every Texec timesteps; assuming no correlation between phase with state, any aliased state has probability
1
Texec of
coinciding with a re-planning step. In the example in Fig. 11, the policy can assuredly imitate the 10 idle actions if it
executes the entire 10-step aliased sequence open-loop, without re-planning (for instance, if policy inference happens
in the state right before ok and execution horizon is at least the length of the idle interval). If the policy re-plans at any
intermediate step, it may wrongly predict to idle for too long or too short.
For mostly unimodal tasks like FurnitureSimOneLeg or GearInsertion, there may not necessarily be aliased
states where some apparently valid action distributions lead to unrecoverable outcomes. In most cases, hidden-state
aliasing is detrimental by inducing unintended cycles — any sequence of states ok
0 →ok+1
1
→ok+2
2
→· · · →ok
T
that revisits a state — that can lead to task timeout. In particular, by revisiting the aliased state ok multiple times,
the policy may repeatedly select the locally-valid cycling action, keeping it in the cycle indefinitely. The simplest
example of such a cycle would be an idle demonstration (i.e. Fig. 11), where a policy that over-predicts idling may
idle forever. We illustrate another example of cycling in Fig. 4. Note that even when cycles do not exist in any single
demonstration, they may appear in the cumulative dataset if the expert is non-Markovian, i.e. if one demonstration
contains ok
t →· · · →ok+1
t+i1, and another contains ok+1
t
→· · · →ok
t+i2.
Figure 12: Illustration of cycling. Two demonstrations jointly induce a cycle in the aggregated dataset. When
observing only o0 or o2, a short-context imitator cannot determine whether to continue or exit the cycle, since both
actions appear valid in the training data. It may therefore repeatedly switch between the demonstrated trajectories and
enter a cycle: o0 →o1 →o2 →o3 →o0. Longer execution horizons reduce the chance of entering such a cycle: a
chunk of actions originating at o0 toward o1 and executed open-loop with Texec ≥3 will cross beyond o2, whereas
re-planning at o2 can increase the chance of returning to o3 and entering a cycle.
Crucially, using an execution horizon of Texec grants immunity from getting trapped in cycles of length < Texec.
Because the policy executes an entire Texec-step action chunk open-loop, it traverses past the aliased state ok in one
open-loop chunk and therefore cannot re-select the cyclic behavior. For cycles longer than Texec, increasing Texec still
reduces probability of cycling by simply decreasing the probability of re-planning on the aliased state to
1
Texec .
24


While the probability of repeating a cycle many times is theoretically very small, Diffusion Policies are known to
overfit and learn high-Lipschitz functions rather than learning the true multimodal expert distribution [72]. In practice,
when a policy repeats a cycle once, we find that it is likely to repeat it many times.
In summary: long open-loop execution can be thought of as a mechanism to reduce the probability of incorrect action
selection from hidden-state aliasing and to prevent unbounded cycling.
C.2
Why Long Context Lengths are a Principled Substitute for Long Execution Horizons
In this section, we argue that long context lengths can serve the same role as long execution horizons when imitating
non-Markovian demonstrations and, when they contain sufficient history, do so more directly. As established in
Sec. C.1, long execution horizons reduce the probability of hidden-state aliasing by reducing the frequency the policy
re-plans at aliased states. Longer contexts instead preserve frequent re-planning while using preceding observations to
disambiguate the expert’s intended behavior at those aliased states. We illustrate this in Fig. 13.
Figure 13: Illustration of how context length disambiguates the expert action distribution. The observations
o2, . . . , ok form an aliased sequence: conditioned only on observations within this sequence, a short-context policy
cannot identify the expert’s intended behavior (whether to imitate demonstration 1 or 2). A long execution horizon
reduces the probability of re-planning within the sequence, but ambiguity remains whenever re-planning occurs there.
By contrast, a sufficiently long context includes the preceding observation o0, which disambiguates the correct expert
action (a1) distribution throughout the sequence, regardless of re-planning phase.
The same distinction applies to cycling. Long execution horizons reduce the opportunity to re-select a cyclic action,
while a context spanning the relevant history can reveal that the aliased state has already been visited and disambiguate
the expert’s exit behavior.
In summary, long contexts address the same failure modes as long execution horizons, but do so in an arguably more
principled way (that also maintains policy reactivity), by eliminating the underlying planning ambiguity rather than
merely reducing how often the policy encounters it.
D
HG-DAgger Implementation Details
We provide additional implementation details for the HG-DAgger experiment in Sec. 4.2. For each expert type, all ex-
ecution horizons were initially evaluated with the same base policy, but HG-DAgger was thereafter run independently
for each execution horizon. Each execution horizon-branch maintained its own aggregated dataset, checkpoints, failure
rollouts, and correction trajectories; correction data were never shared across execution horizons.
In each round, we rolled out the best-performing checkpoint from the preceding round until obtaining 50 failed
episodes. A human annotator labeled the gating timestep of each failure, defined as the first timestep at which the
policy deviated from a nominal trajectory in a manner that ultimately caused failure. For policies trained on non-
Markovian expert data, the annotator also labeled the finite-state-machine state from which to initialize the scripted
expert. The expert was then rolled out from the labeled state until success; episodes were discarded after 10 consecu-
tive failed correction attempts. Provided at least 40 corrections succeeded, we added 40 to the corresponding branch’s
dataset, retrained its policy for 50,000 steps, and evaluated the resulting checkpoints before the next round. We chose
to conduct 3 rounds as this was sufficient for convergence for the experiments in [59] and allows us to assess early
trends in the success-horizon curve, when the effects of DAgger are greatest.
Because HG-DAgger must be run separately for each value of Texec, we only evaluated 5 values of Texec, instead of the
Texec ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15} sweep used in other experiments. We note that, with 3 rounds of HG-DAgger, 50
25


failed rollouts collected at each round, for 5 values of Texec, for both the Markovian and non-Markovian expert: a total
of 1500 episodes had to be manually annotated, by a single annotator for consistency.
E
Exploratory Noise-Injection Experiment
Expanding on Sec. 4.2, we evaluate one more intervention designed to mitigate compounding errors proposed by
Zhang et al. [13]: exploratory noise injection; and we show it’s impact on the success-horizon curve.
Exploratory noise injection mitigates compounding errors by injecting noise during expert data collection to expand
supervision around the expert distribution. We mimic the formulation in [13], where a fraction α of trajectories
are collected cleanly, while the remaining trajectories execute perturbed expert actions ut = π⋆(xt) + σuzt but
record the clean expert label π⋆(xt).5 In our experiment, we treat σu as a scalar, multiplied to state-dependent noise
standard deviations, because different states require different levels of precision. We apply this technique during data
collection using our non-Markovian scripted expert. While Zhang et al.’s theoretical analysis for noise injection require
deterministic Markovian experts, we discuss caveats with using a non-Markovian expert below.
We sweep σu ∈{ 1
16, 1
8, 1
4, 1
2, 1} and α ∈{0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9} and show results in Fig. 14.
Figure 14: Success-horizon curves of policies trained on scripted non-Markovian expert data under exploratory
noise injection. Left: ablation over the action-noise scale σu, with fraction of clean trajectories fixed at α = 0.8.
Right: ablation over clean-trajectory fraction α, with σu = 1
4. We use To = 1 in this experiment for reasons described
below.
Surprisingly, moderate α and σu values improve success rates at both very low Texec = 1 and at very high Texec =
8, 10, 12, 15. Further, poor selection of α and σu degrades performance: small α leaves too few clean trajectories,
while insufficient or excessive action noise σu provides less useful corrective supervision. The experiment doesn’t
show any clear shift of the success-horizon curve preferring lower execution horizons, but we also discuss caveats
with this result in the coming paragraphs.
First, because we use a non-Markovian expert in this experiment, we must use a single-frame context To = 1 and
remove proprioceptive velocity from the observation space. Velocity and multi-frame observations typically provide
strong signals of the expert’s intended direction of motion. Under noise injection, however, these signals also en-
code the applied perturbations, which can obscure the expert’s latent intent and conflate reduced observability with
compounding-error mitigation. This caveat does not bias the result, but explains why we use To = 1 in this experiment.
Second, even with a single-frame context, noise injection may increase multimodality. Our non-Markovian scripted
expert uses an FSM with latched state transitions: if a perturbation moves the system back across a transition boundary
5 As noted by Zhang et al., this intervention has an important caveat in chunked prediction. For one-step behavior cloning,
every perturbed state is paired with a corrective expert action. With multi-step prediction, however, later expert action labels
are evaluated at states reached under noisy actions rather than under the preceding clean action labels in the target chunk. This
state–action-sequence mismatch can make useful exploratory coverage appear as target uncertainty, particularly for long prediction
horizons.
26


immediately after the FSM advances, the FSM remains in its new state. Similar physical states may therefore receive
actions associated with different FSM states, introducing additional target ambiguity. Because the applied perturba-
tions are small relative to the expert’s commanded actions (i.e. 0.005 m standard deviation noise at the highest σu = 1
versus 0.025 m delta actions), we expect this effect to be limited, but it remains relevant when interpreting Fig. 14.
Third, the state-action-sequence mismatch described in Footnote 5 may disproportionately affect policies with long
execution horizons. Although all policies predict multi-step action chunks, long-execution-horizon policies rely more
heavily on later actions in each chunk, where this mismatch is greatest. This artifact therefore biases the comparison
toward preferring shorter execution horizons.
These caveats introduce opposing biases: additional multimodality may favor long execution horizons, whereas state-
action-sequence mismatch may favor short execution horizons. We therefore do not treat this experiment as a clean
test of whether exploratory noise injection reduces the need for long open-loop execution. Nevertheless, it provides
a direct comparison with a complementary compounding-error mitigation technique proposed by Zhang et al. [13].
Within this setting, exploratory noise injection improves absolute performance for some hyperparameter choices, but
provides no clear evidence of systematically reshaping the success-horizon curve toward shorter execution horizons.
F
Additional Details on Long-Context Training
F.1
Double Encoder Method Details
We use a U-Net architecture with a double encoder and cross-attention conditioning. The U-Net and cross-attention
conditioning architecture implementations are taken from [36].
The double encoder is original work. It instantiates two architecturally identical but independently parameterized
observation encoders: a long-range encoder EL and a short-range encoder ES. The long-range encoder is applied to
all To frames, producing long-range tokens zL
t = EL(ot) for t = 0, . . . , To −1. The short-range encoder is applied
only to the most recent Ts frames (Ts ≤To), producing short-range tokens zS
t = ES(ot) for t = To −Ts, . . . , To −1.
The two streams are concatenated into a single conditioning sequence of To + Ts tokens that the denoising network
conditions on via cross-attention. Consequently, the most recent Ts frames are represented twice — once through
the shared long-horizon pathway and once through the short-horizon pathway. This allows the denoising network
to attend to a high-capacity, specialized representation of the immediate past while still retaining the full temporal
context. Each conditioning token receives two additive embeddings before entering the cross-attention blocks: (i) a
temporal embedding, a fixed sinusoidal positional encoding indexed by the token’s original timestep index; and (ii) a
learned range embedding that tags each token as LONG or SHORT, letting the network distinguish the two pathways (a
reserved NULL entry is used for the prepended diffusion-timestep token). All tokens are linearly projected to a shared
width before being attended to at every residual block of the 1D U-Net denoiser via multi-head cross-attention. To
prevent the policy from over-relying on the short-horizon pathway, we apply short-range dropout during training: for
each sample in a minibatch, with probability pshort range dropout all Ts short-range tokens of that sample are replaced by
a single learned null token z∅∈Rd. This dropout is disabled at inference time. In our experiments we use Ts = 2
and pshort range dropout = 0.3.
Note that we use the past-token-prediction auxiliary training objective from [2, 35], where the policy’s predicted action
sequence includes actions corresponding to every observation in the observation sequence. This means To−1 predicted
actions are in the past. In this paper, we treat the prediction horizon Tp as referring to only the predicted actions in the
future and fix this at 15 timesteps, but the actual sequence the policy learns to predict has length Tp + To −1.
F.2
Double Encoder Method Analysis
In this section, we provide a brief comparison between long-context policies (following the cross-attention U-Net
architecture from [36]) trained with and without the double encoder on the FurnitureSimOneLeg task. See Fig. 15
for the results.
While both yield similar absolute performance and exhibit the same trend from Sec. 5, where longer context lengths
improve relative performance at low execution horizons (further supporting that our results are architecture-agnostic),
the policy with the double encoder appears to have much less performance variation between execution horizons.
Although the mechanism underlying this effect is unclear, we hypothesize that the double encoder may be providing
27


Figure 15: FurnitureSimOneLeg success-horizon curves for To ∈{2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20} for policies trained with
double encoder cross attention U-Net and cross attention U-Net (no double encoder) architectures on 200 hu-
man teleop demonstrations. Both plots exhibit similar trends (shorter Texec perform better as To increases) and
comparable absolute performance, but the double encoder architecture exhibits much less variation in performance
across execution horizons, producing smoother and more interpretable curves.
redundant representations of short-range observations, reducing brittleness through either pathway. For this reason,
we use the double encoder in most of our long context experiments.
F.3
Context Length Ablations for PushT-M
While our main context-length ablations in Sec. 5 use PushT-D, for completeness, we also train and evaluate long-
context policies in PushT-M. Results are shown in Fig. 16.
Figure 16: Success-horizon curves from long-context policies trained in PushT-M.
As in PushT-D (Fig. 9), increasing context length shifts performance toward shorter execution horizons. However,
unlike in our other tasks, absolute performance in PushT-M degrades substantially as context length increases. We
hypothesize that this degradation reflects causal confusion exacerbated by visually sparse rendering in the ManiSkill
simulator used in PushT-M — the lighting is bright and there are few visual features, causing unrelated states to
appear similar in the learned representation (we observe that in some rollouts, the policy appears to mistake the T’s
upper corners for its base). This additional state aliasing may exacerbate causal confusion when conditioning on longer
histories. In all other tasks, we find that multiple long-context training methods readily work out of the box. Because
long-context training is not the focus of this work and this degradation may be specific to PushT-M’s simulation
rendering, we leave it as future work to investigate further.
A separate observation is that the To = 2 curve in Fig. 16 can be compared directly with the human-expert PushT
curve in Fig. 3. Both experiments use the same environment, demonstrations, and context length; only the architec-
ture differs: the results here use the double encoder architecture, versus a FiLM-conditioned U-Net in Fig. 3. Both
28


produce the same trend: an inverted U-shaped success-horizon curve with T ∗
exec of 4 or 5. However, we notice an in-
teresting phenomenon: the double encoder policy achieves substantially higher performance at Texec = 1, suggesting
architecture may also influence the success-horizon curve.
To explain this, we speculate that the double encoder’s redundant representations and short-range dropout improve
robustness to policy-induced states, thereby reducing compounding errors at low Texec. Nevertheless, the improved
architecture only changes the magnitude of the low-horizon performance deficit, not the qualitative preference: short-
context policies imitating non-Markovian experts still prefer a non-trivial Texec of 4 – 5. Meanwhile, increasing context
length to improve observability of non-Markovian behaviors still produces a much more substantial shift of T ∗
exec to 1
– 2. Thus, while architectural changes that reduce compounding errors may improve low-horizon performance, their
influence on the success-horizon curve appears much weaker than changes in expert non-Markovianity.
G
Additional Discussion: Multimodality and Smooth Execution
There is a subtle interplay between multimodality in expert demonstrations and smooth execution. Let us assume that
every expert demonstration trajectory is smooth,6 but over the batch of demonstrations there are cases where the same
history can lead to qualitatively different actions (multimodal), e.g. as might have been the case for Buridan’s Ass.
Since the learned policy mimics the distribution of actions, the concept of smoothness coming from each individual
trajectory might be lost, and one might worry again about the learned policy cycling between two different “modes”
in the demonstration data.
Let us assume for the moment that the learner learns perfectly (reconstructing the true distribution optimally given
the available context). If the history/context of the learner is the same or greater than the expert, then all sampled
trajectories must also be smooth (non-smooth trajectories would have zero probability mass). The more interesting
case is where the learner has a more limited context than the expert. Smoothness is only a local property of the
trajectories and does not require arbitrarily long histories. Technically, we are working with sampled-data systems
here, so we can only talk about “discrete smoothness” (e.g., high-order differences quickly decay); if the history
contains k recent samples at the execution sampling rate, then we expect that the outputs will be discretely smooth to
order k −1.
Thus, under perfect learning, we argue that expert multimodality should not by itself cause arbitrarily unsmooth
execution. Learning errors (including due to finite demonstration data) can complicate this, but we leave that analysis
to future work.
H
Additional Discussion: Benefits of Reactivity in Our Experiments
In this section, we provide more concrete examples of the benefits of reactivity in our experiments.
We primarily attribute its benefits to challenging contact dynamics (particularly in FurnitureSimOneLeg, during
the screwing phase, and in Push-T) and high precision requirements (particularly in FurnitureSimOneLeg and
GearInsertion). In FurnitureSimOneLeg, at high Texec, we find a vast majority of failures occur during insertion
(by missing the socket) and screwing (due to the table top sliding away); these failures become very infrequent at low
Texec where the policy can re-aim and adjust when the table begins to slide. Most high-Texec failures in GearInsertion
occur due to missed insertion; in Push-T — due to unexpected T motion that require additional pushing maneuvers
(leading to timeout); in Kitchen — due to lack of precision when grasping objects.
These failure modes illustrate that even nominally static manipulation tasks suffer inevitable execution errors, from
imperfect policy learning, control, interaction dynamics, or otherwise. Reactivity allows policies to quickly correct
such errors, providing beneficial robustness even in otherwise static settings.
6Here, “smoothness” refers qualitatively to discrete-time smoothness of the action sequence, i.e., actions and their higher-order
discrete derivatives vary gradually over time.
29


I
Additional Discussion: The Importance of Checkpoint Selection for Long-Context,
Reactive Policies
Across almost all experiments, we noticed two consistent trends. While conventional Diffusion Policy wisdom pro-
motes over-training past the epoch of minimum validation loss [71] to achieve strong rollout performance, we find:
1. Lower execution horizons prefer earlier checkpoints, i.e. less over-training.
2. Longer context lengths also prefer earlier checkpoints.
Claim 1 holds fairly consistently across all experiments.
We find claim 2 less consistent — we observe
it strongly across the FurnitureSimOneLeg, SinglePillDispense, and SlipIntoBaggie experiments; in
SinglePillDispense, naively evaluating the latest checkpoint even yields up to 40% lower success rates com-
pared to an earlier checkpoint. But we observe no pattern at all in Push-T, GearInsertion, and Kitchen. We
also acknowledge that these comparisons conflate other variables (i.e. network architecture), but nonetheless motivate
evaluating checkpoints throughout training — a precaution that may be crucial in some settings but less so in others.
We plot the optimal training duration against execution horizon in Fig. 17, and against context length in Fig. 18.
Figure 17: Distribution of the optimal training duration (calculated as the fraction of the highest-performing
checkpoint’s epoch divided by the latest evaluated checkpoint’s epoch) as a function of execution horizon, pooled
across all short-context (To = 2) scripted- and human-expert experiments (individual points represent individual
experiments; black diamonds/bars represent median and interquartile range). We observe a consistent trend across
almost all experiments that lower execution horizons prefer earlier checkpoints.
One possible explanation for this phenomenon is that early-stopping training reduces overfitting and improves gen-
eralization to unseen states [73], which is especially important when using long context lengths or short execution
horizons — long context lengths expand the policy’s input space, increasing risk of encountering out-of-distribution
inputs during rollout (see Sec. 5), while short execution horizons allow errors on policy-induced out-of-distribution
states to compound more readily (see Sec. 4.2). The implication is that, to effectively train policies with either long
context lengths and/or short execution horizons, adopting careful checkpoint selection processes is critical.
This implication may become even more important at large data scales. Results from Generalist’s GEN-0 and Sunday’s
ACT-2 suggest that, with enough data, validation loss becomes a strong predictor of closed-loop performance [74, 75].
In this regime, policies no longer face the same tradeoff between generalization and rollout performance: they can
generalize well and perform strongly without over-training. We therefore hypothesize that long-context, reactive
30


Figure 18:
Distribution of the optimal training duration as a function of context length for all
FurnitureSimOneLeg, SinglePillDispense, and SlipIntoBaggie context length experiments (including all ex-
ecution horizons). We observe policies with longer context lengths often perform better at earlier training checkpoints.
policies will become even more favorable at scale. Nevertheless, we note that this analysis is preliminary, and much
remains to be understood about the relationship between checkpoint selection, validation loss, and rollout performance
in behavior cloning.
In relation to Sec. 4.2, this result further contributes that compounding errors especially impact lower execution hori-
zons; but proper checkpoint selection is a simple and standard way to limit this effect.
31
